"IS THERE AN ANSWER?"
An Address by DR. BILLY GRAHAM
Thursday, October 6th, 1955
CHAIRMAN: The President, Dr. C. C. Goldring.
DR. C. C. GOLDRING: It is particularly appropriate for the Empire Club of Canada to begin its 1955-56 season by having as its guest speaker a man who has been designated as "the most potent evangelist in American history".

Dr. Graham came to Toronto at the request of more than five hundred churches, and is conducting meetings which attract many thousands each day or evening. Tens of thousands of Canadians have followed the career of Dr. Billy Graham during recent years. During the years 1951-52-53, the Graham Crusade centred in seventeen major American cities, including Washington, Dallas, Seattle, and Detroit. During each of those years, approximately two and a half million persons attended the crusades. In 1954, Dr. Graham went to Europe and in England and Scotland conducted meetings which were attended by more than 3,100,000 people. Probably his largest single meeting took place at Wembley Stadium when there was an overflow throng of 120,000.

Following his crusade in Britain, he visited Europe and conducted meetings in six countries, having an attendance of some 80,000 on one occasion in Berlin.

From coast to coast many Canadians listen to Dr. Graham's radio broadcasts entitled "Hour of Decision", which is currently heard on more than 400 stations on this continent and approximately fifty foreign stations. He has also appealed to thousands by means of religious films, of which four have now been produced under his general direction.

It is a real pleasure to welcome Dr. Graham here today, and I extend to him, on your behalf, a warm welcome to the Empire Club of Canada.

MR. GRAHAM: Mr. Chairman, gentlemen, members of The Empire Club, and friends who are gathered here today, it is a great delight and privilege for me to be here. I am also grateful for the very generous remarks that have been made by your President, and I am reminded of an incident that happened to the Archbishop of Canterbury some years ago. He was scheduled to visit an orphanage. In preparing for the occasion, the head of the orphanage gathered all the children together and said, "Now, when the Archbishop comes, there is a certain protocol you must observe. The Archbishop of Canterbury is always addressed as either "My Lord" or "Your Grace", and that is the way you are to address him if he stops and talks to any one of you."

So the Archbishop came. When he stopped in front of one little boy, he asked, "Son, how old are you?"

The little boy, frightened, looked up and answered, "My God, I am ten."

Now after the introduction that I have had today and the statistics that have been quoted, I am not sure exactly what you think of me, but we have been looking forward to coming.

I heard a story the other day about a Texan who was playing jokes on another Texan-and when two Texans play jokes on each other, they are really jokes, for they carry to some extremes. It seems that this man had been doped by his friends-he had been given some sort of drug that put him to sleep. They had prepared a grave for him out in the cemetery; and so they put him in the coffin, carried him out to the cemetery and buried him in this grave-but they didn't cover it. The next morning when he awoke, he looked all around and saw that he was lying in a coffin. He looked up at the clear blue sky, then stood up in the grave and looked around at the other tombstones. All of a sudden he gave a shout: "Hallelujah! This is the resurrection morning, and a Texan is the first one up."

I am certain that The Empire Club has a certain amount of pride in the Commonwealth of Nations, and more particularly in the Commonwealth of Canada. It has been my privilege to be in many parts of the British Empire and recently to spend a great deal of time in the British Isles and to make many friends there.

Most of us are aware, I think, that not only Great Britain but also the United States and the entire world are battling, as one United Nations delegate recently said, for our very survival. Economically, morally, politically, religiously and otherwise, we are battling against forces of materialism and humanism and communism that are beating at our gates from without and infiltrating from within. We are living in a period of world history that could either mean the beginning of a new day in history in which all mankind could be lifted to new economic levels and a new standard of living or we could be living in a day in which the entire world could be swept into destruction.

A German scientist recently said in Germany that it is now possible to depopulate the entire earth. That seems strange: that we must be afraid of weapons today. With the advance of science, with the lifting of economic conditions, with the parts of the world that have been illiterate learning to read and write and having advantages of educational, medical and social help that they have not had before, it seems strange that ours should be an age of fear.

Many people are asking, Why? They are asking: What is the solution to our many problems? Which way can we turn? Is there an answer?

Many people feel there is an answer in the United Nations. Others feel there is an answer in economic help to the under-privileged and in the Four Point Programme that President Truman outlined a few years ago. There are many people today with various answers. Everybody is having his say. And now, today, I want to have a say. I want to go back two thousand years to find the answer to the dilemmas and the problems that we face. The United States and Canada were founded by Godfearing men. Whether their faith was Catholic or Protestant they came to these shores believing in God. They had a Bible in their hand. They put into the very foundation of our government "In God We Trust." They believed in Almighty God. They had a strong faith in religious liberty and a strong faith in the Almighty. They believed in God and the Bible. They made the Bible the very basis of our way of life and of our government and of our laws.

But a few years ago we decided that we no longer needed this faith, we no longer needed the Bible, we no longer needed God; and about the turn of the century we saw something happen. We began to feel that in the scientific, economic and industrial advances we had made that somehow science and religion could not be brought together and that religion was something belonging to the archaic past, that it was a group of myths, something to be done away with-and we almost agreed with Lenin when he said it was the opiate of the people.

So we discarded religion. Particularly in intellectual circles, we discarded the supernaturalistic concept: we said we no longer believed in God, we no longer believed in the Bible. So we substituted other things: Reason, Rationalism, Mind Culture, Science Worship, Freudianism, Naturalism, Humanism, Behaviourism, Positivism, Materialism - all the other isms we substituted for religion.

As a result, what happened? We developed our minds and neglected our souls. We forgot that we are more than just bodies with animal passions, animal lusts and animal desires. Oh, yes, we have bodies with eyes and ears and nose and hands and feet. Every one has a body with certain appetites that need satisfying: hunger, sex, thirst, the desire to be with each other, - the herd instinct - all of these things are passions and desires and appetites of the body. So we set about to satisfy our bodies. Our minds also have certain desires to acquire knowledge, so we set about to fill our minds with knowledge. But we neglected a third, a very important part of the human anatomy: the soul. We starved our souls, spiritually, and our souls began to shrivel. We forgot that we had been created in the image of God and that we had living souls that also had appetites. These appetites could only be satisfied by a faith and a communion with God.

We made money; we acquired knowledge; we developed scientifically, until one day we found ourselves with hydrogen bombs in our hands without the ability to control them, and until Sir Winston Churchill said: "We have progressed scientifically and materially, but we have lagged far behind morally, and now our problems have gone beyond us." When Sir Winston asked on the floor of the House of Commons: "Is there an answer?" he sat down without answering the question, because I think even the world's greatest statesman wasn't sure that there was an answer.

We faced a dilemma: the problem of full heads but empty souls. We had departed from the idea of God. We had reared a whole generation by telling them we even doubted that there was a God. Certainly we didn't believe in accepting Him, following Him and serving Him; and morals, instead of being absolute, became relative. Instead of saying that certain things are right and certain things are wrong, and making it clearly white and black, we made it all a dull gray. We said that you could lie and cheat and be dishonest-and we called it "good business."

So our moral standard began to break down, and we began to see the symptoms of this moral breakdown in our society: it broke out into juvenile delinquency, racial hatreds, prejudice and bigotry. All the vast problems that we face today have come about because we have starved the souls of men. Men desire something more than bread to eat, and we remember the words of one of long ago who said: "Man shall not live by bread alone." We need more than bread, we need more than gadgets, ice boxes, automobiles and airplanes.

Why would a beautiful young movie star in Hollywood, at the age of twenty-nine, with a million dollars in the bank, a beautiful face, her name known all over the world, try to commit suicide?

Why would a Texas millionaire, with a hundred million dollars in oil reserves, bow his head the other day and say, "I am the most miserable man in Texas"?

I ask some of you here today . . . you have prestige, you have money; but you haven't found inward peace and happiness and security in your own life-why? You have everything to make a person happy, according to the textbooks, but you haven't found the inward peace you are looking for. Why? Because you have forgotten one thing: you have forgotten you are also a soul created in the image of Almighty God, and that soul, as Saint Augustine said long ago, is restless until it rests in God.

So we produced an age of frustration. Everybody is frustrated. There is nervous tension. I think if historians write up this age, they will call it the Vitamin Capsule Age. We are taking aspirin by the million. In the United States we are taking over three million sleeping tablets every month to go to sleep at night, and then we are taking dexedrine to wake us up in the morning. We have every type of tablet you can possibly think of.

This is an age of selfishness, an age of fear. Look at the titles of the best sellers: The Decline of the West, The Decay and Restoration of Civilization, Civilization on Trial, The End of Our Time, The Crisis of Our Age, The Crisis of Civilization, The Annihilation of Man, The Abolition of Man.

Professor Albert Webber has said: "We are now at the end of history, and we know it."

William Voght, in his Road to Survival, says: "The day of judgment is at hand."

Pessimistic titles! We missed it somewhere. Where did we miss it? We have accepted alternatives to religion and all around us we view the ruins of the secular state offered to humanity as a substitute for religion.

Five years ago, before Mr. Eisenhower's inauguration as President, I had the privilege of being invited to the Commodore Hotel in New York City. I came in, and there sat the man who was to be President of the United States. He got up and greeted me and then went to the window for a full minute. When he turned around, he said: "Billy, do you know why I believe I have been elected President?"

I said, "I think I know several reasons, Sir."

He said: "I think one of them is to help lead America in a religious revival which we must have."

Some time ago it was my privilege to spend forty minutes alone with Sir Winston Churchill when he was Prime Minister at his office at Number 10 Downing Street. In the midst of that conversation he made this statement: "We must have a religious renaissance."

Arnold Toynbee, the great British historian, has said that only a revival of Christianity can save us.

If this is true - and the President has said it, the Prime Minister has said it, the Historian has said it, the scientists are saying it, then I say to you today that you and I, as ordinary citizens, had better be about it! It is the only way out of our dilemma. If the only way for the survival of our boys and girls, the next generation, is a religious revival, we had better be about it in every way we can.

But there is another reason, and that is that you and I have everlasting souls that are accountable to Almighty God. If you are to find peace for the rest of the days of your life, and peace in those last moments and in that hour when you shall stand before your Maker, you had better do something about it!

There was a Man-He wasn't an ordinary man, He was different from any man who ever lived-who came along two thousand years ago and said: "I have an answer." He gave to us in the Sermon on the Mount the greatest moral and social document the world has ever known, but we have never been able to live up to it. Oh, we have tried, but we have failed Why? Because we find no strength within ourselves to live up to it. Everyone has tried to live up to the Sermon on the Mount at some period in his life, but failed. You have no strength, you are not man enough, because when you want to do good, you do bad, and there is something that seems to pull you down all the time and makes you do the things you really don't want to do.

What is it? What is the answer? We forgot one thing this Man said. He was born a man, but He was the God-Man, walking in human flesh; and He said this: "Ye must be born again." What did He mean by this? That is a strange statement. He said it to an educated man, to an intellectual. He said it to a great leader. He said to Nicodemus: "Ye must be born again." He said that human nature must have a renaissance, a turn-about, it must be changed.

You find lying, cheating, bigotry, greed, hatred and immorality wherever you go. Go to India, go to China . . I defy you to go any place in the world where you don't find these things. It is a disease of human nature, and the Bible calls it sin. Jesus Christ said that a man must be born again, he must have a change of human nature, he must be transformed. And Jesus said that He could do it.

You say, "Well, Billy, that is too simple." I know it sounds simple, and it also sounds illogical, and it may not be very academic.

Nicodemus asked Jesus: "How can these things be?" Jesus answered: Marvel not, Nicodemus, you will never understand it. And then the word that followed is faith. "Faith" is used ninety-two times in one book of the Bible alone. And by faith, the Bible promises, if we receive Christ into our hearts as Saviour, Lord and Master, we can have our lives changed and transformed.

When I first heard that I; laughed, as some of you are smiling inside now, although I knew that human nature needed a transformation. The necessity of the re-birth was taught by Wesley and Whitefield, and it led Britain into a religious revival that saved Britain from a bloody revolution such as France was having-almost all historians agree to that. It was an old word that John Whitefield and John Wesley used over and over again: "Ye must be born again." What was meant by that? I laughed at it-I said it couldn't happen.

Then one day I said: I am going to give it a trial. So one night, without emotion (it is not an emotional experience, though it can be), very calmly and very quietly I said: All right, God, I am going to give You a trial. I am going to do what You said to do. I am going to tell You I am willing. I don't have the strength, but I am willing to turn from my, sins, and I am really ready to open my heart to You.

When I did that, something happened in my life. I can't explain it to you, I can't analyze it, I can't put it in a test tube. But I will give you one illustration. I come from the part of the country where men look with bias on those who have different coloured skins than they have, and there is discrimination. When I received Christ, I began to look through different eyes at men of different races, and the colour was gone. There was one of God's creatures, no matter what colour skin or shape of nose he had, and the racial prejudice was gone. I began to love instead of to be prejudiced. My life was changed. It didn't become perfect, and it is not perfect today, but I realized I had a new strength, a new power and a new dynamic for living that gave me the ability to say "No" to temptations that normally come. I had found a new resource.

It wasn't the type of religion that gives one a long face and droopy shoulders. It put a smile on my face, it gave me a spring in my step, a joy in my soul, and the happiness and the peace I longed and looked for.

I have seen men of every walk of life try it. I have seen lords and ladies and royalty, I have seen congressmen and senators, I have seen university professors give their lives to Christ. It has happened right here in Toronto in the last few days. One of your professors at the University of Toronto shook my hand last night and said: "Billy, for the last five days I have been living! I didn't know what living was. I would have laughed at this whole thing two weeks ago, but my life is different. I can't explain it. Some of my friends laugh at me, but my life is different."

Why? Because you are a soul, as well as a body and a mind, you will never find an inward joy, peace, forgiveness and sense of security with God until your soul has been satisfied; and your soul cannot be satisfied apart from God.

Now, how would that affect world affairs, you ask. This is an Empire Club . . . we are interested in discussing political and economic affairs. How can that solve the problems of the world?

Let me ask you this: Do you see any solution during the next hundred years to the problems we face the way we are going? How many of you would agree with me when I tell you that as long as men lie and hate and cheat, as long as there is prejudice and greed in the world, there is the possibility that at X point, somewhere out there, some madman will push a button and make the whole world his funeral pyre? Don't you think Hitler would have done it in his last days if he had had the power?

All right. Suppose we could give the whole world an injection of love instead of hate, suppose we could find a serum we could give the human race that would change them over night . . . do you know any serum like that? It is certainly not education alone, because it was the educated in the civilized nations who fought it out in the last war-it wasn't the primitive nations.

Do you know any answer? The answer I am giving today you may not accept-that is your privilege. It is one answer. I believe it is the answer: that human nature can be transformed. Your life can be transformed. If enough people receive Christ and have their lives transformed by His power, I believe it would make an impact on world affairs.

I am not in favour of war, but neither am I in favour of appeasement. I am in favour of a third force that is very rarely mentioned: I am in favour of gathering such a spiritual and moral force in the world that it will make its weight felt in the affairs of men, that we will have such a religious renaissance in the Western World-and in the whole world, for that matter-that we will demand of our leaders "peace in our time". I believe it can be done. I believe there are many evidences that it is happening in Great Britain, it is happening in Germany, it is happening in the United States, and I believe it is happening in Canada, because men today are beginning to turn back to God, back to the church and back to the Bible. I believe it is the only road out of the confusion and bewilderment that we face today.

There is a picture of a chess game hanging in Paris. On one side of the painting is the Devil, and on the other side is a lad about sixteen years of age. They are playing chess. The Devil has a leering, triumphant expression on his face. He has just licked this boy at chess, and the boy is sitting there with his head bowed and big tears trickling down his cheeks. The Devil has just won in the game of life over this lad. He has no strength, he has no way out, and he has given up. The title of the picture is "Check Mate". He had him.

A famous chess player came through one day. He looked at the painting. He felt sorry for the boy and he hated the looks of the Devil. He began to study the board where the men were placed, and all of a sudden he shouted: "Son, I have found a move, one move . . . if you will make that move you can lick the Devil." He forgot himself, he forgot it was a painting-he was so engrossed in it.

We see all the men of chess in the game of life there, and in some of our lives it seems the Devil has almost got us. We look at the whole world picture ... it seems dark at times with its little bright intervals, but by and large the basic issues have not changed, in spite of the recent smiles on both sides of the Iron Curtain. We see the shadow of the hydrogen bomb and all the vast and terrible weapons being created behind scientific laboratories, and, as we look into the future of the next two or three generations, it seems that we are almost ready to say "Check Mate."

But I believe there is One looking down from above who looks upon the board and says to you and me: There is a move, there is one move that you can make, and you can win! That move is toward Jesus Christ. You can make that move today in your own souls.

Now, today I will turn to the 17th chapter of the book of Acts, beginning at verse 30. Beginning tomorrow evening I am going to ask how many have brought their Bibles. I want everybody to bring a Bible. Now, I'm not a Bibliographist [sic]. I am not asking you to worship with the Bible. I don't use the Bible as a fetish. But I believe that the Bible is God's inspired Word, and in this book we find God's message for us today. I want you to get in the habit of carrying your Bible, reading your Bible, searching the Scriptures with me.


I am not here night after night to put on a show. We are not here to put on an entertainment. We are here to tell you what the Bible has to say. What does the Bible have to say about your problems? What does the Bible have to say about the problems we're facing in the world in which we live today? Night after night, I'm going to ask you to bring your Bibles.

Now you may have just a little Testament; you might not have a Bible at all. Go downtown and get a Bible. If you don't have the money to get a Bible, Beverly Shea will lend you the money. But get a Bible. Bring your Bibles to the services every evening.
In New York, a lot of people brought great big family Bibles that they could hardly carry. Whatever kind of Bible you have, bring it. We're here to study the Bible and see what the Bible has to say. Everybody has a Bible, but very few people know what the Bible says. We don't know what the Bible says; we don't read its pages. The Bible is an uninteresting closed book. I want us to open the Bible together and see what the message of this book is for the day in which we live. The 17th chapter of the book of Acts:

"But now God commandeth all men every where to repent: because he hath appointed a day, in . . . which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter. So Paul departed from among them. Howbeit certain men clave unto him and believed" [verses 30-34].

Here we have a picture of the apostle Paul. He is going throughout the Mediterranean world proclaiming the good news to people in frustration, fear, and sin. And the apostle Paul is preaching Christ to the people, and now he comes to Athens.

Athens was the cultural and intellectual center of the ancient world. It was the city of Plato, Aristotle, and Epicurus. If you take all the universities of America and roll them into one, you have what Athens was to the intellectual world of that day. As in this day, in the midst of intellectual achievements and scientific advances, there existed both confusion and frustration. Greece at that time was under the iron heel of Rome, and the whole world was longing for freedom. They were searching for an answer.

And things haven't changed very much in two thousand years. The world is still searching for an answer. Much of the world is still in slavery. Today Charlotte is considered in the Carolinas one of our intellectual cities. It is considered a city of church-going people. It is considered a religious city. This city is considered an educational center.

The Scriptures say that Paul became spurred on by what he saw. I think the world of our day is also crying for help, as the people in that day were crying for help. The philosophical world is saying, "Come and help us" to the church.

Jean Sartre, who is one of the leaders in modern existentialism, has said, "If you don't believe in God, that's all right. I don't believe in God. But," he said, "believe in something, because man is so philosophically constituted that he needs something to believe in."

So the world of philosophy today for the first time in centuries is crying out to the church, "Help us, give us an answer, we are confused."

The economic world is crying out. Look at India. In India today there are nearly 400 million people – in 1957 (1100 million people – 2007- ed) , increasing at the rate of 5 million a year. Just the problem of population increase alone is bringing about economic pressures that could bring about revolution and trouble in the world to come. Japan has a population of 93 million living on a land area the size of the state of California, increasing at the rate of 1 million a year. China is increasing at the rate of 9 million a year. In twenty-five years, one out of every five babies born in the world will be a Chinese.

The scientific world is crying out, "Help us." Life magazine said not long ago there is a crisis in science. The faster the universe expands, the greater are the areas of ignorance it seems to open. Science has created Frankenstein monsters and doubts its moral ability to control them. We have hydrogen bombs that are ready to be unleashed upon the world.

We are seeing a hardening American attitude. We are seeing verbal blasts back and forth between Russia and America. How long it will only be in the talking phase we do not know, but we do know that our scientists and military leaders are warning that we could be in a nuclear war at any time that could wipe out 60 million Americans in the first few hours.

The political world is crying for help. Communism and democracy, the East and the West, are at each other's throats with two diametrically opposed political ideologies. And the whole political world is saying, "Help us."

A European leader said a few weeks ago, "If the devil could offer a panacea, I would follow the devil." The world is becoming desperate, the world wants an answer, and the world wants an answer quickly.

Thank God that Martin Luther King, who was stabbed last night in New York, was not stabbed by a white person. If he had been, we might have seen a racial war in New York with blood flowing down the street.

Our problems and our tensions are so complicated. No one has the answer. What is the answer? Many people are crying for answers to these problems. The moral problem, mental breakdowns, and other problems arise.

A new word has entered our vocabulary called "escapism." We Americans are trying to escape from reality. We are taking dope, drink, tranquilizing pills, entertainment, and intent upon soul-forgetfulness. People flee from themselves to become lost in the clouds.

And the heroes of modern pictures and films are spiritually homeless. Look at the television programs. How many deal with psychological cases? Every time you look at Gunsmoke [a televsion Western of the time] it sets a psychological problem dressed in western clothes. And I read the other day that the psychiatrists are now going to each other for help.

Edward [Edwin] Arlington Robinson says, "I cannot find my way. There is no star."

Winston Churchill threw up his hands some time ago and said, "Our problems are beyond us."

Paul looked at the confusion of his day in Athens. And the Bible says that Paul was disturbed by what he saw and felt. Ladies and gentlemen, on this warm September afternoon in 1958 I am disturbed by what I see and what I feel. We stand on the brink of catastrophe. Mr. Nehru, speaking to the Indian Parliament, recently said, "We stand on the brink of hell."

Our leaders are warning us, but we have become dead. Our minds are blinded, our wills are paralyzed, and our consciences dulled.

We are so taken up with our money-making, so taken up with the amusements and places and comforts of modern American life, that we don't realize that the forces of evil are closing in round about us. Unless we can turn to God and have His help, we are done for as a nation and as a people.

I do not think that the Charlotte crusade ought to be "another crusade." I do not think it ought to be a crusade kept in the history of the crusades of our team. I think it ought to be something different. I think it ought to be the beginning of a revival throughout the South that can sweep the nation. I think it ought to be something that will set an example to the world and say to the world, "We have an answer. We can solve our problems at the foot of the cross as a community, and we have found an answer to our individual needs in Jesus Christ."

While Paul was disturbed by all this, some of the philosophers came and said, "Paul, we've been listening to you talk. We'd like to hear more of it. How about going up to Mars Hill and giving a lecture?" [See Acts 17:18,19.] And so Paul did. He went up to Mars Hill, and there he preached his famous sermon on Mars Hill. Some people have said that this sermon was a great failure in Paul's life. Some people said that Paul, in preaching this sermon, did not get any results, never founded a great church in Athens, and he never had any persecution and never had any opposition in Athens.

One of the things that disturbs me here is the devil is too quiet. I hope he'll get stirred up somewhere. Because when he is quiet I know he is getting ready to kick us from behind somewhere, while we are not looking.

Every successful work of God must have opposition.

If it doesn't have opposition, there is something wrong with it. Everywhere Paul went he stirred up opposition. Trouble came, and trouble always follows the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, because Satan doesn't like it.

The forces of evil do not like the searchlight pointed in their direction, because "men loved darkness . . . because their deeds [are] evil" [John 3:19].

That day Paul had a great audience out before him in Athens as we have here today. The Athenians had hundreds of different gods and religions. And Charlotte is a very religious city. I'm told that there is one church in this city to every four hundred people, and I do not believe that is equaled anywhere in the world. Not even Edinburgh, Scotland, has as many churches per capita. You are to be congratulated. Thank God.

And, yet, in this city you have one of the highest crime rates in America. What's wrong? Why doesn't it balance out? It may be that we need a revival within our churches. There are thousands of people today who have their name on a church roll that I do not believe have ever made a true commitment to Jesus Christ. Thousands of people who have been named in the church, who go to church once in awhile--if it's not too inconvenient. And they sit for an hour, and they give God one hour. And they say, "O God, how lucky you are to get me for one hour a week." And the rest of the week they live for the devil and live for themselves, and they claim to be Christians. I tell you, in God's sight those people are not Christians. A Christian is a person in whom Christ dwells, and a Christian is a person who lives Christ twenty-four hours a day.

Paul was preaching to a very religious people. Now the Epicureans were there. The Epicureans were a very strange lot of people, and yet they were not so strange--because there are Epicureans here today. The Epicureans are the people who believe that happiness is the goal of life. Eat, drink, be merry, have a good time. Enjoy yourself, be religious, but don't go too far in religion. Have a good time. They spent more time in front of their television sets than they did reading the Bible, if they had television sets in that day. They spent more time reading the newspapers than they did the Bible. They spent more time in the theater than they did in the church. They go to a double feature at a drive-in theater and sit for four hours and think it's too short. They go to church and listen to a twenty-minute sermon and think it's too long. And to some people, because Sunday is a different day and because you do go to church, you can't wait until Monday when business starts again.

I was just reading the life of Robert Murray McCheyne, that great menace to the church of Scotland a hundred years ago. Robert Murray McCheyne, in preaching on the Sabbath day said, "Scotland will be lost if she loses her belief in keeping the Lord's day totally unto God."

We've lost all concept of God's day.

And I want to tell you people who are counting on getting to heaven: Heaven is going to be one long eternal Sabbath day. And in hell there will be no Sabbath days.

There are a lot of you who, if you got to heaven, heaven would be hell for you, because you don't like the Sabbath. And you don't like to keep the Lord's day in the Lord's way. I believe that we need to get old-fashioned in keeping the Lord's day.

And so the audience was there. The Epicureans said, "Have a good time." Everybody is saying that today. Why, in some of our dairy barns today, they even have the radio going so that the cows can dance a tune while they're giving the milk. Everybody has to be entertained. The radio has to blare, the television has to be on, a magazine has to be in one hand and chewing gum in the mouth with a few aspirins thrown in between. And we say we're having a good time. What a society of people we are. No wonder we are told about deterioration today.

I wish every one of you could have read about two weeks ago the front-page editorial in the morning newspaper in Philadelphia, about the need for return to discipline in our lives and keeping of the Ten Commandments and the Sermon on the Mount.

The Stoics were also there in Paul's audience that day. Now the Stoics were proud and self-righteous. They were the intellectual snobs. They didn't need God. They didn't need a personal experience with Christ. They were self-righteous. And I tell you that we are in danger of being like the Pharisees of old. The most scathing denunciation that Jesus had was against the Pharisees and their self-righteousness. The sins that God hates the most are the sins of pride and self-righteousness. The Bible concludes that we are all sinners.

Paul stood up to that crowd to preach his sermon. And the first thing that Paul said was this: "There is one God." He said, "I saw an inscription coming up this mountain that said, 'To the unknown God.' Oh, I perceive that you are religious people. You believe in some sort of God, but you don't know Him." [See Acts 17:22.]

And there are many of us today that believe in God, but we really don't know Him. When we wake up in the morning, His presence does not instill our room. When we go to bed at night, our last thought is not on Him. When we go to pray, we spend so little time, and we get no answers to our prayers. And God means so little to us. We go to church because it's the traditional thing and social thing. We don't go because we really love Christ. We've never had a true experience with Him until He fills our lives.

Paul said, "I want to tell you about this God" [verse 23]. Yet, we are becoming conscious of God today. The Bible tells us that God is creator and preserver of the universe [see Genesis 1:1]. But the Bible says, "God is a Spirit" [John 4:24]. The Bible says God is unchanging. The Bible says that God does not change one iota. He doesn't change the batting of an eyelash. [See Malachi 3:6.] God is the same yesterday, today, and forever [see Hebrews 13:8].

We have an idea in this country that God is changed to accommodate Himself for Americans.

We have an idea that we Americans are God's chosen people, that God loves us more than any other people,
and that we are God's blessed. I tell you that God doesn't love us any more than He does the Russians. He doesn't love us any more than He does the Chinese. He doesn't love us any more than He does the Africans. God doesn't love us any more than any other people. There is no changing with God, and there is no partiality with God.

The Bible says God is righteous [see Psalm 145:17]. And there are a lot of you who can't understand the Old Testament when you read it. You know why? Because the Old Testament is teaching one thing: The Old Testament is teaching the holiness and the righteousness of God. You'll never understand it until you understand that God was teaching that He is a holy God. And no sin can come into God's presence because He's holy [see Habakkuk 1:13]. God is a holy and righteous God. And the Bible says that God will judge the world [see Acts 17:31].

We have an idea today that God is like a Santa Claus, sitting on a cloud somewhere with a harp in His hand, forgiving everybody. God is not like that at all. God is a God of judgment. He is the God of righteousness and holiness, and the Bible says here that He will not wink at sin [see Acts 17:30,31]. You think that you can get away with your lying. I'll tell you, you cannot. You think you can get away with your cheating. I tell you, you cannot. You think you can get away with your adultery, your jealousy, your sins, and the lust in your heart, and the evil thoughts that you have, and the evil moments that you have. I tell you, God says we shall be judged.

The Bible says, "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" [Romans 3:23].

 I am a sinner and you are a sinner. Every one of us is a sinner in God's sight.

But the Bible also tells us that God is a God of love.

 "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life" [John 3:16].

The Bible tells us God commended His love to us and that "while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us" [Romans 5:8].

The Bible tells us that because God is love, He created man. Why did God create us in the first place? He put us here and He created us because He is love and He wanted to have an object to love; and so He created the human race. We were perfect, and we had fellowship with God. Adam and Eve walked with God in the cool of the day. They were friends. God and man were friends. They walked together, they talked together, they planned together. But then one day something happened, because when God created you, He gave you the ability to choose between right and wrong. He gave you the ability to choose whether you would follow God and serve God, or whether you would live your own life and build your own life apart from God. When man came to that great decisive moment in his life, he turned away from God and decided that he could build his own life without God. And he broke his covenant with God; he broke his relationship with God; he sinned against God. [See Genesis 2,3.]

And that's the reason we have war today. That's the reason we have racial tension today. That's the reason we have all these problems in the world today. It is because the hearts of men are sinful. We are away from God. And that's the reason you have the problems in your personal life that you can't solve. That's the reason there are things within your own heart that you don't understand.

God, looking down from heaven one day, saw this earth in its turmoil and strife and sinfulness, saw us in our lost condition, saw us in our sins. And the Bible says that God said, "I love you. I love you. I love you. I want to save you."


But how could God? He fills all of space. He is the mighty God of creation that flung those billions of stars out into space. So God did something that astounded the universe. God became a man. That's who Jesus Christ was. He was God. And when I see Jesus making the blind to see, I see God. When I see Jesus feeding the five thousand, I see God interested in the hunger and the desires of men. When I see Jesus dying on the cross,

I see God in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself. I see the nails in His hands. I see the spike in His feet. I see the crown of thorns on His brow. I hear Him say, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" [see Matthew 27:46]. In that terrible moment, Jesus was separated from God in a mysterious way that none of us understood. And now God said, "This is my Son, in whom I am well pleased. Believe in Him. Receive Him. And I will save you." [See Matthew 17:5.]

But Jesus didn't stay on the cross. They put Him in the tomb, and on the third day He rose again. And I do not offer you this afternoon a dead Christ. I offer you a risen Christ, a Christ that is at the right hand of God the Father, and who is some day going to come to judge the quick and the dead [see Acts 10:41,42]. I offer you a triumphant Christ who is going to win.

A lot of people say, "Do you think communism is going to win the world?" They might win it temporarily, but it will only be temporarily. Because the Bible says that Jesus Christ is going to establish His kingdom, and the church shall some day triumph. Some day those of us who know Christ shall reign with Him [see Revelation 5:10]. God within Christ is reconciling the world unto Himself [see

2 Corinthians 5:19]. But God said, "I gave my Son to die."

Now there are three things you have to do to get to heaven and have your sins forgiven; if you're to have Christ in your life, and if you're to have a new life and a transformed nature, if you're to have your sins forgiven. If you're to go to heaven, you're going to have to do three things. I've studied this Bible for twenty years, and I do not believe any man or woman will get to heaven who hasn't done these three things. I don't care who you are. You may be a Sunday school teacher, you may be a deacon, an elder, or a steward. I don't care who you are. If you haven't done these three things, I do not believe you can get to heaven.

First, you must repent of your sins.

The Scripture says in this passage, "God. . .commandeth all men every where to repent" [Acts 17:30]. That's not a command from me. I didn't say it. I want to ask you tonight, or this afternoon, have you repented? Has there been a time in your life when you repented? You might have been confirmed, you might have been baptized; and you might be born again in your heart, but you're not sure of it. You're not certain of it. You're not sure that there has ever been a moment when you really repented of your sins and renounced them. You can do it today.

"What do you mean by repentance?" I mean that you ac-

knowledge to God that you have sinned, and that you are willing to turn from your sins. Notice I said willing. You may not have the strength to turn from your sins, but by faith you are willing to turn if God will give you the strength. You say, "Billy, there are things in my life that are wrong, but I cannot give them up. I've tried. I just can't do it." If you are willing, God will give you the strength to give them up and turn from them.

Secondly, you must receive Christ by faith;

An act of receiving Christ to die for you. Now that is a definite act. It may be unconscious, or it may be conscious. It may be a quiet moment; it may be a decisive, climactic moment as it was in the life of Paul. But if you're not sure by faith you've received Christ, you'd better do it today.

There are three little men who live inside us all--our intellect, our emotions, and our will. Intellectually, thousands of you believe in Christ. I doubt if there is anyone here who doesn't believe in Christ. You believe in Him with your minds. In fact, the Bible says the devil believes. And the devil does more than you do, because he trembles when he believes the Bible [see James 2:19]. But that's not enough. You may have some emotion in your religion. You may have had an emotional experience at some time, but you never have really received Christ. You must by faith receive Him, because it is an act of your will. You say, "I will trust Him, I will follow."

You know why I ask people to come forward in our meeting to receive Christ? Because all the way through the Scriptures, I learned that God wanted people to do something as a testimonial of their faith. When Jesus healed the man with the withered arm, He could have said, "Be healed," and he would have been healed. But He didn't do it. He said, "Stretch it forth," and the man stretched it forth. Now he had tried to stretch it forth many times, but he couldn't. But at the behest of Jesus, he did stretch it forth and it was healed. [See Matthew 12:10-13.] Jesus wanted him to do something. I am asking you to come today to give your life to Christ, to do something, to receive Christ who trusts you.

The third thing you must do: You must obey Christ.

You must be willing to follow Him and serve Him from this moment on. Follow and serve Him. It means self-denial, it means cross-bearing, it means obedience. It means that you are going to burn all of your bridges behind you and follow Christ, no matter what it costs. It means you go back to your business and back to your home and live Christ, no matter what it costs. It means you are going to renew your vows to the church. It means you are going to be faithful and loyal to your church as never before. You are going to start tithing to the church.

It means you are going to start praying in your home. It means you are going to start living for Christ, no matter what the costs, from this moment on. That's what it means. And if you are not willing to do that, don't come to Jesus Christ. He will not accept you just part of the way. You must be willing to go all the way.

When Paul had finished his sermon he stopped. And when the invitation was given that day, three things took place that are going to take place here this afternoon. One, there was derision. Some of them laughed at him and mocked him [see Acts 17:32]. They didn't mock him out loud; just quietly and sighed, "Well, that's not for me."

Somebody said I had come to Charlotte to try to get everybody in the Baptist church. I heard about a fellow with a cat some time ago. He was trying to sell a little kitten. He was taking it up and down the street. And he said, "This is a Baptist kitten, a Baptist kitten for sale." And he couldn't sell it. The next day he came around, he said, "It's a Methodist kitten." The man said, "Why, these are the same kittens as yesterday. Why do you call them Methodist kittens?" "Well, today they've got their eyes open."

You may be a Baptist, a Presbyterian, or Methodist, or Episcopal, or Moravian, or a Lutheran, or a Catholic, or Jew. But if you have never really had a vital encounter with Jesus Christ, you make sure today.

Secondly, there were some who said, "We will hear again of this matter" [see verse 32]. They put it off. Governor Felix said to Paul, "Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee" [Acts 24:25]. I want to tell you, this is a dangerous action because you may never hear anyone present the Gospel again. Some of the philosophers were never able to climb Mars Hill again.

The Bible says,
 "He that hardeneth his heart, being often reproved, shall suddenly be cut off and not without remedy" [see Proverbs 29:1].

You never know. To some of you who go out on the slick highways this afternoon, this may be the last sermon you will ever hear. In every crusade we have ever conducted anywhere, there have been people who have come to the meeting in good health and never came back because they were dead in the next few hours through an accident, or a heart attack, or something else.

We never know when our moment is coming. Maybe God spoke to you this afternoon, and your heart is in danger of being hardened. Some of you are older people; some of you are younger people. The Bible says once you hear the Gospel and do nothing about it, you are in danger of being hardening your heart.

But, last of all, there were some that made a decision [see Acts 17:34]. They received Christ and went their way rejoicing. I am going to ask you today to receive Him. I am not asking you this afternoon to join some special church. I'm asking you today to give your life to Christ.

You may be a member of a choir. I don't know who you are or what you are, but you want to give your life to Christ on this opening Sunday afternoon. I'm going to ask you to do a hard thing, because coming to Christ is not easy. So many people have made it too easy. Jesus went to the cross and died in your place. Certainly, you can come a few steps from where you are sitting and stand here, quietly and reverently, and with bowed head. And say, "I need God; I need Christ. I want to be forgiven of my sins. I want a new life, and I want to start a new direction today."

You may be a rich man;
      you may be a poor man.
            You may be a man of great intellectual capacities,
                  and you have to come by faith.

Because you'll never understand it all intellectually.

If you want to…… come to the cross and give your life to Christ,

I'm going to ask you to come. If you are with friends and relatives, they'll wait on you. There's plenty of time and I'm going to ask not a person to leave the Coliseum.

We have been saved by grace through faith. The apostle Paul emphatically states, "a man is not justified by the works of the Law but through faith in Christ Jesus, even we have believed in Christ Jesus, that we may be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the Law; since by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified." (Galatians 2:16).

Justification is a legal standing with God based upon Christ's death and resurrection and our faith in Him. The word Paul uses (dikaioo), comes from Roman legal courts meaning to declare to be righteous, or to pronounce righteous. Therefore, justification is the legal and formal acquittal from guilt by God who is Judge. It is the pronouncement of the sinner as righteous, who believes on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Let's suppose for a moment that I died tonight and stood before the Lord God who is the Supreme Judge of the Universe. No doubt He would ask me, "Wil Pounds, why should I let you into my heaven? You are a guilty sinner. How do you plead?"

My response would be, "I plead guilty, Your Honor."

My advocate, Jesus Christ, who is standing there beside me speaks up for me. He says, "Your Honor. It is true that Wil Pounds is a grievous sinner. He is guilty. However, Father, I died for him on the cross and rose from the dead. Wil Pounds has put his faith and trust in Me and all that I have done for Him on the Cross. He is a believer. I died for him, and he has accepted Me as his substitute."

The Lord God turns to me and says, "Is that true?"

I will respond to Him, "Yes sir! That is the truth. I am claiming the shed blood of Jesus Christ to cleanse me of all my sins. I have put my faith in Jesus to save me for all eternity. This is what You have promised in Your Word. Jesus said, 'For God so loved the world (and this includes Wil Pounds), that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.'"

The Lord God responds: "Acquitted! By order of this court I demand that you be set free. The price has been paid by My Son."

Furthermore, I get to go home and live with the Judge!

Justification means that at the moment of salvation God sovereignly declares the believing sinner righteous in His sight. The believing sinner is declared to be righteous in His standing before God. From that moment on throughout life, through death, that sinner who has believed is now and forever right before God. God accepts him, and he stands acquitted of his sins.

A man is not justified by the works of the Law but through faith in Christ Jesus, even we have believed in Christ Jesus, that we may be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the Law; since by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified (Galatians 2:16). 
 Now, today I will turn to the 17th chapter of the book of Acts, beginning at verse 30. Beginning tomorrow evening I am going to ask how many have brought their Bibles. I want everybody to bring a Bible. Now, I'm not a Bibliographist [sic]. I am not asking you to worship with the Bible. I don't use the Bible as a fetish. But I believe that the Bible is God's inspired Word, and in this book we find God's message for us today. I want you to get in the habit of carrying your Bible, reading your Bible, searching the Scriptures with me.

I am not here night after night to put on a show. We are not here to put on an entertainment. We are here to tell you what the Bible has to say. What does the Bible have to say about your problems? What does the Bible have to say about the problems we're facing in the world in which we live today? Night after night, I'm going to ask you to bring your Bibles.

Now you may have just a little Testament; you might not have a Bible at all. Go downtown and get a Bible. If you don't have the money to get a Bible, Beverly Shea will lend you the money. But get a Bible. Bring your Bibles to the services every evening.

In New York, a lot of people brought great big family Bibles that they could hardly carry. Whatever kind of Bible you have, bring it. We're here to study the Bible and see what the Bible has to say. Everybody has a Bible, but very few people know what the Bible says. We don't know what the Bible says; we don't read its pages. The Bible is an uninteresting closed book. I want us to open the Bible together and see what the message of this book is for the day in which we live. The 17th chapter of the book of Acts:

"But now God commandeth all men every where to repent: because he hath appointed a day, in . . . which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter. So Paul departed from among them. Howbeit certain men clave unto him and believed" [verses 30-34].

Here we have a picture of the apostle Paul. He is going throughout the Mediterranean world proclaiming the good news to people in frustration, fear, and sin. And the apostle Paul is preaching Christ to the people, and now he comes to Athens.

Athens was the cultural and intellectual center of the ancient world. It was the city of Plato, Aristotle, and Epicurus. If you take all the universities of America and roll them into one, you have what Athens was to the intellectual world of that day. As in this day, in the midst of intellectual achievements and scientific advances, there existed both confusion and frustration. Greece at that time was under the iron heel of Rome, and the whole world was longing for freedom. They were searching for an answer.

And things haven't changed very much in two thousand years. The world is still searching for an answer. Much of the world is still in slavery. Today Charlotte is considered in the Carolinas one of our intellectual cities. It is considered a city of church-going people. It is considered a religious city. This city is considered an educational center.

The Scriptures say that Paul became spurred on by what he saw. I think the world of our day is also crying for help, as the people in that day were crying for help. The philosophical world is saying, "Come and help us" to the church.

Jean Sartre, who is one of the leaders in modern existentialism, has said, "If you don't believe in God, that's all right. I don't believe in God. But," he said, "believe in something, because man is so philosophically constituted that he needs something to believe in."

So the world of philosophy today for the first time in centuries is crying out to the church, "Help us, give us an answer, we are confused."

The economic world is crying out. Look at India. In India today there are nearly 400 million people, increasing at the rate of

5 million a year. Just the problem of population increase alone is bringing about economic pressures that could bring about revolution and trouble in the world to come. Japan has a population of 93 million living on a land area the size of the state of California, increasing at the rate of 1 million a year. China is increasing at the rate of 9 million a year. In twenty-five years, one out of every five babies born in the world will be a Chinese.

The scientific world is crying out, "Help us." Life magazine said not long ago there is a crisis in science. The faster the universe expands, the greater are the areas of ignorance it seems to open. Science has created Frankenstein monsters and doubts its moral ability to control them. We have hydrogen bombs that are ready to be unleashed upon the world.

We are seeing a hardening American attitude. We are seeing verbal blasts back and forth between Russia and America. How long it will only be in the talking phase we do not know, but we do know that our scientists and military leaders are warning that we could be in a nuclear war at any time that could wipe out 60 million Americans in the first few hours.

The political world is crying for help. Communism and democracy, the East and the West, are at each other's throats with two diametrically opposed political ideologies. And the whole political world is saying, "Help us."

A European leader said a few weeks ago, "If the devil could offer a panacea, I would follow the devil." The world is becoming desperate, the world wants an answer, and the world wants an answer quickly.

Thank God that Martin Luther King, who was stabbed last night in New York, was not stabbed by a white person. If he had been, we might have seen a racial war in New York with blood flowing down the street.

Our problems and our tensions are so complicated. No one has the answer. What is the answer? Many people are crying for answers to these problems. The moral problem, mental breakdowns, and other problems arise.

A new word has entered our vocabulary called "escapism." We Americans are trying to escape from reality. We are taking dope, drink, tranquilizing pills, entertainment, and intent upon soul-forgetfulness. People flee from themselves to become lost in the clouds.

And the heroes of modern pictures and films are spiritually homeless. Look at the television programs. How many deal with psychological cases? Every time you look at Gunsmoke [a televsion Western of the time] it sets a psychological problem dressed in western clothes. And I read the other day that the psychiatrists are now going to each other for help.

Edward [Edwin] Arlington Robinson says, "I cannot find my way. There is no star."

Winston Churchill threw up his hands some time ago and said, "Our problems are beyond us."

Paul looked at the confusion of his day in Athens. And the Bible says that Paul was disturbed by what he saw and felt. Ladies and gentlemen, on this warm September afternoon in 1958 I am disturbed by what I see and what I feel. We stand on the brink of catastrophe. Mr. Nehru, speaking to the Indian Parliament, recently said, "We stand on the brink of hell."

Our leaders are warning us, but we have become dead. Our minds are blinded, our wills are paralyzed, and our consciences dulled.

We are so taken up with our money-making, so taken up with the amusements and places and comforts of modern American life, that we don't realize that the forces of evil are closing in round about us. Unless we can turn to God and have His help, we are done for as a nation and as a people.

I do not think that the Charlotte crusade ought to be "another crusade." I do not think it ought to be a crusade kept in the history of the crusades of our team. I think it ought to be something different. I think it ought to be the beginning of a revival throughout the South that can sweep the nation. I think it ought to be something that will set an example to the world and say to the world, "We have an answer. We can solve our problems at the foot of the cross as a community, and we have found an answer to our individual needs in Jesus Christ."

While Paul was disturbed by all this, some of the philosophers came and said, "Paul, we've been listening to you talk. We'd like to hear more of it. How about going up to Mars Hill and giving a lecture?" [See Acts 17:18,19.] And so Paul did. He went up to Mars Hill, and there he preached his famous sermon on Mars Hill. Some people have said that this sermon was a great failure in Paul's life. Some people said that Paul, in preaching this sermon, did not get any results, never founded a great church in Athens, and he never had any persecution and never had any opposition in Athens.

One of the things that disturbs me here is the devil is too quiet. I hope he'll get stirred up somewhere. Because when he is quiet I know he is getting ready to kick us from behind somewhere, while we are not looking.

Every successful work of God must have opposition. If it doesn't have opposition, there is something wrong with it. Everywhere Paul went he stirred up opposition. Trouble came, and trouble always follows the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, because Satan doesn't like it.

The forces of evil do not like the searchlight pointed in their direction, because "men loved darkness . . . because their deeds [are] evil" [John 3:19].

That day Paul had a great audience out before him in Athens as we have here today. The Athenians had hundreds of different gods and religions. And Charlotte is a very religious city. I'm told that there is one church in this city to every four hundred people, and I do not believe that is equaled anywhere in the world. Not even Edinburgh, Scotland, has as many churches per capita. You are to be congratulated. Thank God.

And, yet, in this city you have one of the highest crime rates in America. What's wrong? Why doesn't it balance out? It may be that we need a revival within our churches. There are thousands of people today who have their name on a church roll that I do not believe have ever made a true commitment to Jesus Christ. Thousands of people who have been named in the church, who go to church once in awhile--if it's not too inconvenient. And they sit for an hour, and they give God one hour. And they say, "O God, how lucky you are to get me for one hour a week." And the rest of the week they live for the devil and live for themselves, and they claim to be Christians. I tell you, in God's sight those people are not Christians. A Christian is a person in whom Christ dwells, and a Christian is a person who lives Christ twenty-four hours a day.

Paul was preaching to a very religious people. Now the Epicureans were there. The Epicureans were a very strange lot of people, and yet they were not so strange--because there are Epicureans here today. The Epicureans are the people who believe that happiness is the goal of life. Eat, drink, be merry, have a good time. Enjoy yourself, be religious, but don't go too far in religion. Have a good time. They spent more time in front of their television sets than they did reading the Bible, if they had television sets in that day. They spent more time reading the newspapers than they did the Bible. They spent more time in the theater than they did in the church. They go to a double feature at a drive-in theater and sit for four hours and think it's too short. They go to church and listen to a twenty-minute sermon and think it's too long. And to some people, because Sunday is a different day and because you do go to church, you can't wait until Monday when business starts again.

I was just reading the life of Robert Murray McCheyne, that great menace to the church of Scotland a hundred years ago. Robert Murray McCheyne, in preaching on the Sabbath day said, "Scotland will be lost if she loses her belief in keeping the Lord's day totally unto God."

We've lost all concept of God's day. And I want to tell you people who are counting on getting to heaven: Heaven is going to be one long eternal Sabbath day. And in hell there will be no Sabbath days.

There are a lot of you who, if you got to heaven, heaven would be hell for you, because you don't like the Sabbath. And you don't like to keep the Lord's day in the Lord's way. I believe that we need to get old-fashioned in keeping the Lord's day.

And so the audience was there. The Epicureans said, "Have a good time." Everybody is saying that today. Why, in some of our dairy barns today, they even have the radio going so that the cows can dance a tune while they're giving the milk. Everybody has to be entertained. The radio has to blare, the television has to be on, a magazine has to be in one hand and chewing gum in the mouth with a few aspirins thrown in between. And we say we're having a good time. What a society of people we are. No wonder we are told about deterioration today.

I wish every one of you could have read about two weeks ago the front-page editorial in the morning newspaper in Philadelphia, about the need for return to discipline in our lives and keeping of the Ten Commandments and the Sermon on the Mount.

The Stoics were also there in Paul's audience that day. Now the Stoics were proud and self-righteous. They were the intellectual snobs. They didn't need God. They didn't need a personal experience with Christ. They were self-righteous. And I tell you that we are in danger of being like the Pharisees of old. The most scathing denunciation that Jesus had was against the Pharisees and their self-righteousness. The sins that God hates the most are the sins of pride and self-righteousness. The Bible concludes that we are all sinners.

Paul stood up to that crowd to preach his sermon. And the first thing that Paul said was this: "There is one God." He said, "I saw an inscription coming up this mountain that said, 'To the unknown God.' Oh, I perceive that you are religious people. You believe in some sort of God, but you don't know Him." [See Acts 17:22.]

And there are many of us today that believe in God, but we really don't know Him. When we wake up in the morning, His presence does not instill our room. When we go to bed at night, our last thought is not on Him. When we go to pray, we spend so little time, and we get no answers to our prayers. And God means so little to us. We go to church because it's the traditional thing and social thing. We don't go because we really love Christ. We've never had a true experience with Him until He fills our lives.

Paul said, "I want to tell you about this God" [verse 23]. Yet, we are becoming conscious of God today. The Bible tells us that God is creator and preserver of the universe [see Genesis 1:1]. But the Bible says, "God is a Spirit" [John 4:24]. The Bible says God is unchanging. The Bible says that God does not change one iota. He doesn't change the batting of an eyelash. [See Malachi 3:6.] God is the same yesterday, today, and forever [see Hebrews 13:8].

We have an idea in this country that God is changed to accommodate Himself for Americans. We have an idea that we Americans are God's chosen people, that God loves us more than any other people, and that we are God's blessed. I tell you that God doesn't love us any more than He does the Russians. He doesn't love us any more than He does the Chinese. He doesn't love us any more than He does the Africans. God doesn't love us any more than any other people. There is no changing with God, and there is no partiality with God.

The Bible says God is righteous [see Psalm 145:17]. And there are a lot of you who can't understand the Old Testament when you read it. You know why? Because the Old Testament is teaching one thing: The Old Testament is teaching the holiness and the righteousness of God. You'll never understand it until you understand that God was teaching that He is a holy God. And no sin can come into God's presence because He's holy [see Habakkuk 1:13]. God is a holy and righteous God. And the Bible says that God will judge the world [see Acts 17:31].

We have an idea today that God is like a Santa Claus, sitting on a cloud somewhere with a harp in His hand, forgiving everybody. God is not like that at all. God is a God of judgment. He is the God of righteousness and holiness, and the Bible says here that He will not wink at sin [see Acts 17:30,31]. You think that you can get away with your lying. I'll tell you, you cannot. You think you can get away with your cheating. I tell you, you cannot. You think you can get away with your adultery, your jealousy, your sins, and the lust in your heart, and the evil thoughts that you have, and the evil moments that you have. I tell you, God says we shall be judged. The Bible says, "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" [Romans 3:23]. I am a sinner and you are a sinner. Every one of us is a sinner in God's sight.

But the Bible also tells us that God is a God of love. "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life" [John 3:16]. The Bible tells us God commended His love to us and that "while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us" [Romans 5:8].

The Bible tells us that because God is love, He created man. Why did God create us in the first place? He put us here and He created us because He is love and He wanted to have an object to love; and so He created the human race. We were perfect, and we had fellowship with God. Adam and Eve walked with God in the cool of the day. They were friends. God and man were friends. They walked together, they talked together, they planned together. But then one day something happened, because when God created you, He gave you the ability to choose between right and wrong. He gave you the ability to choose whether you would follow God and serve God, or whether you would live your own life and build your own life apart from God. When man came to that great decisive moment in his life, he turned away from God and decided that he could build his own life without God. And he broke his covenant with God; he broke his relationship with God; he sinned against God. [See Genesis 2,3.]

And that's the reason we have war today. That's the reason we have racial tension today. That's the reason we have all these problems in the world today. It is because the hearts of men are sinful. We are away from God. And that's the reason you have the problems in your personal life that you can't solve. That's the reason there are things within your own heart that you don't understand.

God, looking down from heaven one day, saw this earth in its turmoil and strife and sinfulness, saw us in our lost condition, saw us in our sins. And the Bible says that God said, "I love you. I love you. I love you. I want to save you."

But how could God? He fills all of space. He is the mighty God of creation that flung those billions of stars out into space. So God did something that astounded the universe. God became a man. That's who Jesus Christ was. He was God. And when I see Jesus making the blind to see, I see God. When I see Jesus feeding the five thousand, I see God interested in the hunger and the desires of men. When I see Jesus dying on the cross, I see God in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself. I see the nails in His hands. I see the spike in His feet. I see the crown of thorns on His brow. I hear Him say, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" [see Matthew 27:46]. In that terrible moment, Jesus was separated from God in a mysterious way that none of us understood. And now God said, "This is my Son, in whom I am well pleased. Believe in Him. Receive Him. And I will save you." [See Matthew 17:5.]

But Jesus didn't stay on the cross. They put Him in the tomb, and on the third day He rose again. And I do not offer you this afternoon a dead Christ. I offer you a risen Christ, a Christ that is at the right hand of God the Father, and who is some day going to come to judge the quick and the dead [see Acts 10:41,42]. I offer you a triumphant Christ who is going to win.

A lot of people say, "Do you think communism is going to win the world?" They might win it temporarily, but it will only be temporarily. Because the Bible says that Jesus Christ is going to establish His kingdom, and the church shall some day triumph. Some day those of us who know Christ shall reign with Him [see Revelation 5:10]. God within Christ is reconciling the world unto Himself [see

2 Corinthians 5:19]. But God said, "I gave my Son to die."

Now there are three things you have to do to get to heaven and have your sins forgiven; if you're to have Christ in your life, and if you're to have a new life and a transformed nature, if you're to have your sins forgiven. If you're to go to heaven, you're going to have to do three things. I've studied this Bible for twenty years, and I do not believe any man or woman will get to heaven who hasn't done these three things. I don't care who you are. You may be a Sunday school teacher, you may be a deacon, an elder, or a steward. I don't care who you are. If you haven't done these three things, I do not believe you can get to heaven.

First, you must repent of your sins. The Scripture says in this passage, "God. . .commandeth all men every where to repent" [Acts 17:30]. That's not a command from me. I didn't say it. I want to ask you tonight, or this afternoon, have you repented? Has there been a time in your life when you repented? You might have been confirmed, you might have been baptized; and you might be born again in your heart, but you're not sure of it. You're not certain of it. You're not sure that there has ever been a moment when you really repented of your sins and renounced them. You can do it today.

"What do you mean by repentance?" I mean that you ac-

knowledge to God that you have sinned, and that you are willing to turn from your sins. Notice I said willing. You may not have the strength to turn from your sins, but by faith you are willing to turn if God will give you the strength. You say, "Billy, there are things in my life that are wrong, but I cannot give them up. I've tried. I just can't do it." If you are willing, God will give you the strength to give them up and turn from them.

Secondly, you must receive Christ by faith; an act of receiving Christ to die for you. Now that is a definite act. It may be unconscious, or it may be conscious. It may be a quiet moment; it may be a decisive, climactic moment as it was in the life of Paul. But if you're not sure by faith you've received Christ, you'd better do it today.

There are three little men who live inside us all--our intellect, our emotions, and our will. Intellectually, thousands of you believe in Christ. I doubt if there is anyone here who doesn't believe in Christ. You believe in Him with your minds. In fact, the Bible says the devil believes. And the devil does more than you do, because he trembles when he believes the Bible [see James 2:19]. But that's not enough. You may have some emotion in your religion. You may have had an emotional experience at some time, but you never have really received Christ. You must by faith receive Him, because it is an act of your will. You say, "I will trust Him, I will follow."

You know why I ask people to come forward in our meeting to receive Christ? Because all the way through the Scriptures, I learned that God wanted people to do something as a testimonial of their faith. When Jesus healed the man with the withered arm, He could have said, "Be healed," and he would have been healed. But He didn't do it. He said, "Stretch it forth," and the man stretched it forth. Now he had tried to stretch it forth many times, but he couldn't. But at the behest of Jesus, he did stretch it forth and it was healed. [See Matthew 12:10-13.] Jesus wanted him to do something. I am asking you to come today to give your life to Christ, to do something, to receive Christ who trusts you.

The third thing you must do: You must obey Christ. You must be willing to follow Him and serve Him from this moment on. Follow and serve Him. It means self-denial, it means cross-bearing, it means obedience. It means that you are going to burn all of your bridges behind you and follow Christ, no matter what it costs. It means you go back to your business and back to your home and live Christ, no matter what it costs. It means you are going to renew your vows to the church. It means you are going to be faithful and loyal to your church as never before. You are going to start tithing to the church.

It means you are going to start praying in your home. It means you are going to start living for Christ, no matter what the costs, from this moment on. That's what it means. And if you are not willing to do that, don't come to Jesus Christ. He will not accept you just part of the way. You must be willing to go all the way.

When Paul had finished his sermon he stopped. And when the invitation was given that day, three things took place that are going to take place here this afternoon. One, there was derision. Some of them laughed at him and mocked him [see Acts 17:32]. They didn't mock him out loud; just quietly and sighed, "Well, that's not for me."

Somebody said I had come to Charlotte to try to get everybody in the Baptist church. I heard about a fellow with a cat some time ago. He was trying to sell a little kitten. He was taking it up and down the street. And he said, "This is a Baptist kitten, a Baptist kitten for sale." And he couldn't sell it. The next day he came around, he said, "It's a Methodist kitten." The man said, "Why, these are the same kittens as yesterday. Why do you call them Methodist kittens?" "Well, today they've got their eyes open."

You may be a Baptist, a Presbyterian, or Methodist, or Episcopal, or Moravian, or a Lutheran, or a Catholic, or Jew. But if you have never really had a vital encounter with Jesus Christ, you make sure today.

Secondly, there were some who said, "We will hear again of this matter" [see verse 32]. They put it off. Governor Felix said to Paul, "Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee" [Acts 24:25]. I want to tell you, this is a dangerous action because you may never hear anyone present the Gospel again. Some of the philosophers were never able to climb Mars Hill again.

The Bible says, "He that hardeneth his heart, being often reproved, shall suddenly be cut off and not without remedy" [see Proverbs 29:1].

You never know. To some of you who go out on the slick highways this afternoon, this may be the last sermon you will ever hear. In every crusade we have ever conducted anywhere, there have been people who have come to the meeting in good health and never came back because they were dead in the next few hours through an accident, or a heart attack, or something else.

We never know when our moment is coming. Maybe God spoke to you this afternoon, and your heart is in danger of being hardened. Some of you are older people; some of you are younger people. The Bible says once you hear the Gospel and do nothing about it, you are in danger of being hardening your heart.

But, last of all, there were some that made a decision [see Acts 17:34]. They received Christ and went their way rejoicing. I am going to ask you today to receive Him. I am not asking you this afternoon to join some special church. I'm asking you today to give your life to Christ.

You may be a member of a choir. I don't know who you are or what you are, but you want to give your life to Christ on this opening Sunday afternoon. I'm going to ask you to do a hard thing, because coming to Christ is not easy. So many people have made it too easy. Jesus went to the cross and died in your place. Certainly, you can come a few steps from where you are sitting and stand here, quietly and reverently, and with bowed head. And say, "I need God; I need Christ. I want to be forgiven of my sins. I want a new life, and I want to start a new direction today."

You may be a rich man; you may be a poor man. You may be a man of great intellectual capacities, and you have to come by faith. Because you'll never understand it all intellectually. If you want to come to the cross and give your life to Christ, I'm going to ask you to come. If you are with friends and relatives, they'll wait on you. There's plenty of time and I'm going to ask not a person to leave the Coliseum.

 Now tonight, I want you to turn with me to the 22nd chapter of the Gospel according to St. Matthew. How many of you have your Bibles? Lift them up. My, that's a wonderful start tonight. We want to open the pages of the Bible every night to see what the Bible has to say.

"Then one of them, [who] was a lawyer, asked him a question, [testing] him, and saying, Master, which is the great commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like . . . it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets" [verses 35-40].

Now I want you to turn to Exodus, the second book in the Bible, the 20th chapter and the 7th verse. And we read, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain."

I have read to you a passage from the Ten Commandments--the third commandment, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." I have also read Christ's interpretation of the Ten Commandments. In fact, the entire Sermon on the Mount is an explanation of the Ten Commandments. You never understand the full impact and the full meaning of the Ten Commandments until you understand and read and study the Sermon on the Mount. And then Christ summed up all the commandments, saying, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. . . . And . . . thy neighbor as thyself" [Matthew 22:37,39].

About two years ago Mr. Cecil B. DeMille was on top of Mount Sinai, and he asked to be left alone for an entire day. He sat there meditating as he was planning to shoot the picture, "The Ten Commandments." While he was there, he ordered his men to cut out of the granite on top of Mount Sinai two tablets of stone, and he had written in Hebrew the Ten Commandments. He sent me those Ten Commandments the other day, mounted on a beautiful thing; and I have them in my study. Every time I pass through my study, I see those Ten Commandments. It reminds me of what the law says. And it also reminds me of how far short every one of us--as professing Christians--come as to what God meant for us to be as Christians.

I could, and I shall before I leave, preach a sermon entitled, "What Is Right About The Church?" There is a great deal right about the church. But tonight I want to tell you what's wrong with the church. I believe that, basically, the thing that's wrong with us today is that we are neglecting to live according to the third commandment.

We in the church today have an excellent organization. We have the buildings. We have beautiful seminaries. We have Bibles. We have excellent training. We have plenty of money. We have everything. And we should be making a tremendous impact, not only on this nation, but the entire world. But I fear today that the church is not speaking with the power and the authority and the incisiveness to the relevant problems that we face as we should. Why?

In the early church, the men had been filled with the Holy Spirit, went out to turn the world upside down, and in one generation they had turned the world upside down. They were men of fervor. They had a dedication, and a strength, and a power that we seem to lack. They had no preliminaries. They had no church music. They had very little education. They had no printing presses, no radio, no television, no coliseum to meet in. Yet in one generation they shook the entire Roman world. We have everything today, and we are not making the impact on our society that the older church made on the society of its day. Why?

I am convinced that one of the reasons communism is gaining such momentum throughout the world--and it is; I do not know one place in the world tonight in which communism is losing. I do not know one great victory we have won in recent years over communism. It's gaining slowly but surely, nibbling here and nibbling there, a little bit there and a little bit here, and coming ever closer to the shores of this country. The communist radio in Peiping [Beijing] said yesterday, "War could break out at any moment." Why? Because they're dedicated. They are out-dedicating the Christians.

A handful of communists are winning the world, while 600 million Christians are losing the world. Why? Because they believe in something, and they are ready to die for it. They have an ideology and a philosophy and a religion that they are ready to live for and die for. And we're taking it easy. We serve God with our lips and our heart is far from Him [see Isaiah 29:13].

When the communists came into China, I had a friend who was captured. And a communist lieutenant that had graduated from an American university--this young communist lieutenant who had graduated from an American university came to my friend and said, "We are going to take the next two tonight." My friend said, "The Nationalists have ten thousand troops over there, and you've got only five thousand. They'll kill you." This young communist convert pulled himself to his full height and said, "I will gladly die that communism will advance itself one more mile." Ladies and gentlemen, we need this same kind of dedication.

We look into these Ten Commandments tonight, and in the commandment of our Lord Jesus Christ we find a secret. We find something hidden in these passages that speaks to us tonight about our failure as a church. We're failing as deacons and elders. We're failing as Sunday School teachers, failing today as a church, collectively and individually. Unless we wake up and unless we recommit ourselves to the Savior, and unless we are willing to go back into society and live completely dedicated lives for Christ, no matter how much it costs, we may lose. The church as we know it today may someday have to go underground as it did in the days of the great persecution, and as it has done in China, and as it has done in other parts of the world.

I look into the law tonight of the Ten Commandments, and I find something there. The law was never meant to save anybody. Now God knew when He gave the Ten Commandments that nobody could keep them. He didn't give the Ten Commandments to save anybody's soul. Nobody can be saved by the law. You can keep all the Ten Commandments and you wouldn't be saved because the law never justified anybody.

God gave the law for one specific purpose. He gave the law to be a mirror. And when I look in the Ten Commandments and read them, and understand them, it shows me how far short I've come. But the law cannot forgive, the law cannot save, the law cannot cleanse me from my sins. I believe before this week is over I shall prove to you night after night that every one of us in this audience has broken every commandment.

You say, "But, Billy, I've never killed anybody. Doesn't the Lord say, 'Thou shalt not murder'?" Yes, Jesus, interpreting that passage, said, "If you've ever hated anybody, you have broken my commandments" [see 1 John 3:15]. Under that comes prejudice, and bigotry, and malice, and contempt.

A Christian leader wrote another Christian leader the other day, and I've got a copy of the letter. He said, "I hold you in utter contempt." You look up the word "contempt" in the dictionary; and it means "I have hatred, I have malice for you."

Jesus said, "Any man who hates his brother is going to hell" [see Matthew 5:22]. I didn't say it; Jesus said it. So we've broken that commandment.

You say, "But, Billy, I've never stolen anything." Haven't you? Did you ever cheat on your income tax, even a little bit? Did you ever cheat in school? You've broken every commandment.

You say, "But I've never committed adultery." Haven't you? Jesus said, "If you've ever had lust in your heart, you've committed adultery" [see Matthew 5:28].

We've all sinned and come short of the glory of God [see Romans 3:23]. You're a sinner, and I'm a sinner. We've all broken God's law, and the law was to show us that we're sinners. I see that I'm wrong, that I'm a sinner. But the law cannot correct; it cannot save. Because salvation came through Christ.

And then the law was given for something else. It becomes a schoolmaster [see Galatians 3:24]. It becomes an usher to drive me to the cross of Christ.

I read those commandments and say, "My God, I haven't kept them. My God, I'm a sinner." And then I hear the thunder from Sinai, and I see the lightning. I hear the judgment of God's thunder and wrath. I hear that the wages of the broken law is sin, and that sin bringeth forth death [see James 1:15]. And I know that every man who breaks that law is lost. And immediately I say, "How can I be saved?"

I find the answer in the grace, and mercy, and the love of God at the cross of Calvary where Christ died and shed His blood for my sins. No one will ever be saved apart from the cross. That's one thing that every Protestant church that I know about and every Catholic church agrees. And that is that the cross is the center of Christianity. There is no salvation apart from the cross.

We're not saved by work. We're not saved by joining organizations. We're saved by the grace of God in Christ at the cross. And you can only come by the way of the cross.

Let's look at one commandment tonight and see where we failed as a church. This was the rule that God gave us to live by. These were rules. This shows us what a man ought to be. This shows us what we ought to be as Christians. We have a new nature. You see, the world doesn't have the power to love its neighbor. That's the reason you'll never solve the race problems until men's hearts have been changed. You can't make people love their neighbors who have never been born again and regenerated and filled with the love of God. Love each other? They just don't have the capacity to love. They have to come to Christ first, and there they have love.

We'll never have world peace as long as there's hatred in the hearts of men. As long as men have hatred, they're going to fight. That's the reason men have to come to Christ and have their hearts changed before you can have world peace.

That's the reason you can't find a solution for your own problems. That's the reason there's inner tension, strife, a sense of incompleteness. You haven't found yourself in life because you come short of God's requirements. You're a sinner, and you won't find the joy and the peace that you have searched for all your life until you come to the cross and give your life to the Savior. "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain."

The Bible teaches us that God is jealous of His name [see Ezekiel 39:25]. The Bible has many names concerning God. The Bible tells us that God is all-knowing. He knows everything. He knows the secrets of your heart. "The [deeds] of [men] are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings" [Proverbs 5:21]. The Bible tells us God is holy. The Bible tells us that God is love. "He that loveth not, [knows] not God; for God is love" [1 John 4:8]. All the way through the Bible there are many names concerning God--who God is, and what God is. And God is jealous of His name and reputation. One of the most grievous sins that can be committed is to blaspheme the name of God.

You will go to any lengths to protect your name. We have laws in the state of North Carolina to protect a man's reputation and a man's name against slander. God is jealous of His name, and there are several ways that we take His name in vain.

First, we take the name of God in vain when we speak slightly or irreverently of His name, or when we use profanity. In Deuteronomy, the writer says, "That thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name, The Lord Thy God" [28:58]. The God that flung the stars into space. The God that scooped the valleys and built the mountains. It's mighty God!

When they would come to it, the writers of the Old Testament would come to His name, they would leave it blank. They were even afraid to desecrate His name by writing it down. And how lightly we take the name of God in vain today. Jesus, when speaking of His Father, said, "Hallowed be thy name" [Luke 11:2].

If you would go to England and you would meet the queen--as it has been my privilege to meet her on several occasions--you wouldn't go up to her and say, "Hi, Lib." I remember the first time my wife and I met royalty. We were invited by Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, and Princess Margaret to Clarence House. My wife and I practiced. My wife was learning to do a curtsy and I was learning to bow properly and to say, "Your Majesty" or "Your Highness," as the case may be. I remember when we got there, my wife went to shake hands with Queen Elizabeth; and she stumbled and nearly fell. I forgot to bow altogether, I was so excited.

When you meet the queen, you call her, "Your Majesty." When you meet the President, you don't say, "Hi." You say, "Mr. President." You respect his title and his office. When you come before God, "Hallowed be thy name." How many times we take His name in vain!

I heard a woman today take His name in vain, in swearing. I heard about a woman who was dressed in slacks some time ago. She was drunk. She was smoking. She got on a crowded bus and, in profane words, she asked if there was a gentleman who would give a lady a seat. The man sitting there said, "You may be a woman, but you dress like a man, you smoke like a man, you drink like a man, and you swear like a man. It seems to me that you could stand up like a man."

You say that you are in the habit of swearing. "I just can't help it." Suppose you told that to a judge. You'd committed a murder; and you say, "Well, Judge, I'm in the habit of murdering; and I just can't help it." The same Ten Commandments that say, "Thou shalt not kill," say, "Thou shalt not take His name in vain."

Secondly, we take God's name in vain when we defile our bodies. Your body, the Bible says, is created in the image of God; your soul is created in the image of God [see Genesis 1:27]. Your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit [see 1 Corinthians 6:19]. And any man that defiles his body, the Bible says, is taking the name of God in vain. You claim to be a Christian? Yet you fill your body with narcotics; you fill your body with drink, or you are guilty of gluttony.

I preached a sermon not long ago on gluttony. About a third of my audience got mad. All I did was preach the Bible. And you look up the word "gluttony" in the Bible and see how much the Bible condemns overeating. Now, some people have glandular trouble and can't help being fat. A fellow like me can eat anything and it doesn't bother him. I can say all this. But Grady Wilson always leaves the platform when I preach on this subject. When you engage in sinful and immoral pleasure, you are taking the name of the Lord in vain.

Thirdly, we take the name of God in vain when we make vows and don't keep them. You took a marriage vow. Have you kept it? Maybe you've forgot how much you promised your wife that night you were married. You were so frightened you didn't know what you were saying in promise. But it was a vow before almighty God. And some of you men have broken it by your immorality. You've broken your vow by your neglect. You've broken your vow by your unfaithfulness. You've broken your vow. I tell you, you took a sacred vow before God. And you took His name in vain. You said, "In God's name, I promise," and you didn't keep your promise.

You took His name in vain when you took that church vow and have not kept it. You took a vow at confirmation, if you are an Episcopalian or a Lutheran. You took a vow at baptism, you took a vow in communion, you took a vow when you joined the church. You vowed that you were going to give a part of your income to the church, and you've never tithed once. You've been guilty of robbing God of tithes and offerings.

I believe that every church member owes a tithe to his own church. I didn't say that you owe a tithe to the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association. I don't believe that anybody has a right to give a tithe to anybody but his own church. But if you want to give above your tithe, give it where you want. But I believe your tithe belongs to your own church. But you haven't kept that vow.

You promised that you would be in the services unless providentially hindered, and many a golf game has come between you and the church. Many a fishing tour has come between you and the church. You have broken a vow that you took in the name of God. And you have taken His name in vain, and you've broken the third commandment.

You solemnly said, "I will pay thee my vows which my lips have uttered when I was in trouble." You took a vow when you were in trouble. Remember in the war? You said, "O God, if you bring me through the war, I'll live a decent life and a better life." He brought you through, and you haven't kept your vow.

Remember when the baby was sick, and you thought the baby was going to die; and you made a promise to God, but then you didn't keep it? The baby got well. God remembers, and God is some day going to hold you accountable for the promises you made and didn't keep. And then we break the third commandment.

We take the name of God in vain when we call ourselves Christians but do not live it. In other words, they profess Christ, Titus says, but in works they deny Him [see Titus 1:16]. When you claim to be a Christian, and are filled with lying and jealousy and malice and pride and lust and hypocrisy, you're dragging the name of God down. You're taking His name in vain.

I'll never forget. We were staying in a certain southern city. I won't call the name of the city, it's too close here. We were staying in a hotel, and I'll never forget they were having a convention in that hotel. And we had to get up and preach the next morning, Grady Wilson and I. My wife was there, and his wife. My wife and I were in one room. And next door to us was a big room, and about fifty people were in there. And they were drinking and singing some of the lewdest songs I've heard on Sunday night. And that went on until about 2 a.m. We couldn't get any sleep.

So, finally, I said, "I'm going to do something about this." I got on my bathrobe, and I went over and I knocked on the door. A woman came to the door; and she had a drink in her hand, and she was half gone. She said, "Whatta you want?" I said, "We would appreciate your being quiet. We're trying to get some sleep." She said, "Why don't you come on in?" I said, "Well, I'm a minister of the Gospel, and I don't see how we can come in. But we would appreciate your being quiet." And she turned around and said, "Hey, everybody, there's a preacher here." And they all stopped and came crowding around. And I introduced myself, and they looked a little surprised. I said, "You know, you all ought to be ashamed of yourselves. I bet most of you are church members. Here it is Sunday night, half of you are drunk." And I said, "I bet some of you are even church officers." And one man spoke up and said, "That's right, preacher, I'm a deacon." And a lady spoke up and said, "I'm a Sunday school teacher."

They were taking the name of God in vain. They claimed to be Christians, but they were not living like Christians. Suppose my wife took the name of Graham, and yet she was not faithful to me and did not live right, like my wife should live. She would be taking the name of Graham in vain. You've taken the name of Christ. And when you claim to be a Christian and don't live like it, you're taking His name in vain and you're breaking the third commandment.

Alexander the Great had a man in his army by the name of Alexander who was the wild man. He didn't live anything as he should live as a soldier in Alexander's army, because Alexander was a great disciplinarian. One day Alexander the Great had him brought in; and he said, "Your name is Alexander?" The man said, "Yes." Alexander the Great said, "Change your name or change your ways. You can't live as you live and be called Alexander."

I believe that God would say to us tonight as Christians, "Change your name or change your ways." It would be better for you to get out of the church and not even claim to be a Christian, than to claim to be a Christian and not live it. The whole 23rd chapter of Matthew is against the hypocrites. The most scathing denunciations that Jesus ever gave were against hypocrites, people who profess one thing and live another. How many people in this audience are ashamed of Christ? You've taken His name in vain.

I was at a Rotary Club meeting recently. I had a Bible with me. I wasn't a speaker. I sat down at the table with my Bible because all of these men sitting around me were church officers except about two. They all looked so ashamed and so embarrassed when I put my Bible on the table. They wanted to talk about everything but Christ. Think of it! Supposed solid followers of Jesus Christ and ashamed to talk about it.

I've never met a communist who was ashamed to talk about communism and the writings of Marx and Lenin and Stalin. And yet we Christians are ashamed to witness for Christ. There are people in your neighborhood who need Jesus Christ; and yet you haven't decided to go get them and bring them here that they might find Christ. You're ashamed to, you're afraid to, you're timid, you're too shy. Though you're a good salesman--you go out and sell your product. You're a good fellow at the factory. You talk about television. You can talk about the baseball scores. You can talk about the Yanks. You can talk about Willie Mays hitting a home run, but you can't talk about Jesus Christ dying on the cross. You are taking His name in vain.

Dr. Dahlberg, president of the National Council of Churches, said last week, "We have too many Fifth Amendment Christians, afraid to witness for Christ for fear that what they say will be used against them." How many Fifth Amendment Christians do we have in Charlotte tonight, taking the Fifth Amendment?

"I am afraid that if I speak to Christ, it will hurt my business." "I am afraid if I speak to Christ, it will hurt my standing at the country club." "I am afraid if I speak to Christ, it will hurt my position at the school." We need Christians today that will say, "If it will mean my business is ruined, if it means my social standing is no longer there, if it means death, I am ready to take my stand for Jesus Christ, no matter what it costs."

Will you be that kind of a Christian? Will you go back to your church to be a more dedicated Christian, a more consecrated Christian? And then there are thousands of people here tonight that have never met Christ--not really. You got by the minister and you got by the board of the church, but you really never had a personal encounter with Christ. You're not sure that your sins are forgiven. You're not sure that, if you died that you would go to heaven. You are not sure that you're ready to meet God. But you ought to be.

And I ask all of you that would receive Christ and have this encounter with Him, and let Him forgive your sins, and trust Him as your Lord and Savior, to get up out of your seats and come and stand right here. Arise reverently--men, women, young people--and say, "Tonight I want Christ as my Lord and Savior."

You may be a member of a church. You may not be a member of any church. I don't know who you are, what you are. But you're not certain that your sins are forgiven. You're not certain that you are ready to meet God. If you want to receive Him tonight, you want to go home with the peace and the joy that only Christ can give, I want you to get up out of your seat right now and come quickly.

Now tonight I want you to turn with me to Ecclesiastes, 12th chapter. How many have your Bibles tonight? Lift them up. Wonderful. Thousands of people brought their Bibles. We want you to bring a Bible every night.

The 12th chapter of Ecclesiastes, "Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them; while the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain; in the day when the keepers" (substitute the word "hand" now; he's talking about your hand) "when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves" (at your shoulder in old age) "and the grinders" (that's your teeth) "cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened" [verses 1-3].

Now, I'll go over that again because I see a lot of you writing it in. The keepers are hands, the strong men are shoulders, the grinders are teeth, and the windows are eyes. The Bible is very simple when you read it like that, isn't it?

Tonight I want to talk to young people (all of you who are under ninety-nine) especially the teenagers. By the way, how many young people are here tonight, and you are under twenty-five years of age? I want you to stand up. I never knew there were so many gray-headed and bald-headed people under twenty-five. You may be seated. Wonderful.

Someone has said that man's life is divided into three parts: childhood, adolescence, and adulthood. Adolescence is that transitional period and, in my opinion, by far the most difficult phase of life. Young people today, teenagers, are a generation who have never known depression. They have never known wars. They do not seem to have the stamina or the discipline of the former generations. Their thoughts and reactions are somewhat different, but they have the potential of being better or worse.

I find that teenagers today are baffled by the world in which we live, and they are trying to make up their minds about many things. We haven't given them very much of a lull. And I find in my travels around that to teenagers grownups are squares, and they can't dig the jive. They have a language, and a star, and a philosophy all their own.

I heard about one of these cats who went to church Sunday morning. And when the pastor greeted him at the door, he said, "Dad, you really blasted me this morning. That sermon was neat, reet, and really sweet. You were on the beam. You were really on the beam. You were really true, Dad, I mean true."

The minister gulped with astonishment and said, "I beg your pardon." The teenager continued, "Dad, I mean you were on the beam, and I was reading you clear. That jive was so hep that I dropped twenty-two dollars in the plate. Dad, you were great." The minister looked at the teenager, smiled, and said, "Crazy, man, crazy!"

The language of the teenager is teenage jive. Its philosophers are the disc jockeys, and its lawgivers are rock-and-roll song writers. However, it is a mistaken belief that all teenagers can be typed. There are thousands of young people in this country who have found a cure for the frustrations, the contradictions, and the insecurities of adolescence through accepting Christ and His way of life.

Look magazine, a few months ago, ran an article on the problems of teenagers. And they listed six problems that I want to list tonight, though I must confess that I don't think that teenagers are going to the dogs any more than the last generation went to the dogs. We laugh at their songs. But we forget that we sang crazy ditties in our time too--the zany age when we were best described as crazy, mixed-up kids.

I'm sure that if somebody had seen me as a teenager in Charlotte, they would have thought I was crazy, and off the beam, and going to the dogs, and down to hell. I probably was. I remember driving my father's car down the middle of town on the sidewalk. I remember turning it in the square with the policeman shouting, "You can't do it!" And I said, "I think I can!" I remember riding in a convertible with my girlfriend, standing up in the back of it with a cow bell, in the middle of the town, ringing it. All those things, and a lot more that I won't tell you about.

But we've heard the sociologist and psychologist analyze the problems of youth. And tonight I want to discuss the problems of youth from the point of view of the Bible.

I heard about a father who took his son aside one day and said, "Son, don't you think it's about time you and I discussed the facts of life?" The boy answered, "I sure do, Dad. What do you want to know?" A lot of our teenagers know a lot more about the facts of life than the older people.

Our young people today are living in a changing world, and their own lives are changing. These are the changing, formative years when patterns of behavior are being made and decisions that affect later years are arrived at. It's during the teenage period, usually, that you choose your life companion. It's during the teenage period that you usually choose your vocation. So the teenage period is an important period, and the most important period because it's when you're a teenager that seventy-five percent of us decide what we're going to do about God, and what we're going to do about Christ.

Habits are being formed that last a lifetime. God decides the many perplexing problems in this period of growing up. And the Bible directs many admonitions to young people. The Bible says, "How then shall a young man cleanse his way?" Then comes the answer, "By taking heed thereto according to thy word" [Psalm 119:9].

Solomon, whom we have just read, had tried everything. He had success, he had security, he had tried sex, he had tried amusements. And he said, "Vanity of vanities" [Ecclesiastes 1:2]. It's all vanity.

He said remember God when you're a young person. Solomon had more money than any man that ever lived. Solomon had more sex than any man who ever lived. Solomon had more amusement than any man who ever lived. And Solomon said to the young people of his day, "Remember God while you're young."

We have some problems among teenagers today. First, there is the problem of a search for security. Sixty percent of teenagers today are going steady. Why? Because they're searching for security, so our psychologists tell us. They live in an insecure world. And what youth needs is not to have judgment passed upon them--they need guidance. I am convinced that Christ can give that security that you have been searching for.

I find in my travels that young people want leadership. They want direction, they want a master, they want a controller. Man was built for God. And without God as the center of his life, he becomes frustrated and confused, desperately clutching and searching for security. Christ said, "Ye call me Lord and Master: ye do well" [John 13:13]. Ye do well, for so I ask it.

All over the world tonight young people are searching for security. They want to be controlled, they want a master, they want a center to life, they want something to believe in. I believe that Jesus Christ can become the controller. He can become the Master. He can become the Lord of your life.

In Russia today, young people are disciplined. I have a friend who has just returned from Russia. He's been there for several weeks. He said he never saw a lewd picture. He said, "I never saw a drunk person." He said, "I went to the universities, I went to the schools, and I found dedication and discipline in hard work. Because," he said, "the Soviet Union believes in something." They have an ideology, they have a control, they have a security in their state in communism.

And, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that one of the problems among teenagers today is that they need something to believe in. They need a cause, they need a challenge, they need a flag to follow. They want a master. They want someone to control them, just as Hitler was able to get the youth of Germany, and Mussolini was able to get the youth of Italy, and the communists were able to get the youth of Eastern Europe.

I believe that Jesus Christ can capture the youth of America. Let's march under His flag and under His banner, giving ourselves completely to Him without reservation. I believe there will be an answer to this search for security on the part of youngsters. When you come to Jesus Christ, you must give yourself completely to Him--your intellect, your emotion, and your will. I do not believe that a person is truly converted to Christ until the whole man has been presented to Christ.

There are many people who believe in Christ, but that is not enough. The Bible says, "Believe on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved" [Acts 16:31]. And a lot of people go around saying, "Believe on Christ, and you will be saved." No, it is a lot more than that, because you don't understand that word "believe."

That word in Greek means a great deal more than it does in English. The word "believe" means more than an intellectual comprehension of a dogma. It means more than an understanding of a theology. The word "believe" means that not only do I believe with my mind in Christ and allow my mind to be conformed to Him, but it also means that my emotional life is centered in Jesus Christ. It means that I hate sin, and hate is an emotion. It means that I love Christ, and love is an emotion. It means that the very center of your emotional life is Christ.

It also means a surrender of the world, and if you are willing to say to Christ, "I will give myself to thee." Because, you see, every young person--almost every young person--outside of Christ is self-centered. Everything is for self. What can I get out of it? You don't think very often of others. You are not thinking of others continually--always self. Now when you come to Christ, that is inverted. It is Christ first, others second, and self last. That's what Jesus meant when He said, "If any man will come after me, let him deny self" [see Mark 8:34]. Let him deny the ego of self-centeredness. And your selfishness and self-centeredness is gone, and your will is given into the will of Christ. Has that happened to you? Has there ever been a moment when, intellectually and emotionally and volitionally, you've given yourself to Christ? Your mind, your emotions, and your will. If there hasn't been, you can tonight give yourself to Christ.

Secondly, there is the problem of sex. Some people today are obsessed by sex, yet they are troubled and often conscience-stricken.

We're living today in a period that Professor Sorokin of Harvard University has called the American sex revolution. He says that it's the greatest revolution in the history of the world--greater than the communist revolution! And he says this revolution will destroy America unless the present trend is reversed. Our literature, our music, many of our films, even our advertising, have become obsessed with sex. And so young people are faced with it everywhere.

Now, there's nothing wrong with sex. It's a God-given instinct. And if it's used right, it's a wonderful service. If it's used wrongly, it's a terrible tyrant. Sex is not moral, or unmoral--it's amoral. But the Bible warns young people, "Flee youthful lust" [see 2 Timothy 2:22].

Now, I know this is one of the hardest problems young people have today. And if you lose the battle of sex, you've lost the battle of life. If you win this battle, you've won the greatest battle in life. If you can take this creative energy that God has given to every normal young person and give it over to Christ, it can be used to take you to the top. If you misuse it, it will damn you in this life and the life to come.

The Bible says, "Thou shalt not commit immorality" [Exodus 20:14]. But Jesus said if you've ever had lust in your heart, you've already committed it [see Matthew 5:27,28]. And you can commit this sin by a thought, by a look, or by an act. And thousands today are guilty of having broken this commandment and sinned against God. And you don't have any power to overcome these habits, and these temptations, and this drive, and this energy that you have. So we try to rationalize and say, "Well, everybody is doing it."

Well, I want to tell you that's not the way God looks at it. God demands that we flee from youthful lust. And there is no victory, young person, outside of Christ. But I guarantee that if you give your life to Jesus Christ completely, He will forgive the past and give you victory and power to overcome the temptations tomorrow. I do not believe there is any power on earth that can keep us free from sin in this direction except Jesus Christ. If you will give yourself to Jesus Christ tonight, He will give you a new dynamic, and a new power, and a new resistance to the sins and the temptations around about us.

Thirdly, young people today find themselves with too much leisure time. "What can we do?" is the theme song of the typical teenager of 1958. Too many of them act like guests at a dude ranch instead of members of a household. But that isn't altogether their fault. They're products of a system called "modern living," and many of them are more to be pitied than censured.

Idleness can play strange tricks on the soul. Much of our delinquency can be charged to too many idle hours. The Bible warns against idleness and tells us to "redeem the time, because the days are evil" [Ephesians 5:16]. You tell me, young person, how you spend your leisure time, and I'll tell you the type of person you are. Many in this generation are wasting their substance of life in gluttonous living, like the prodigal son of old [see Luke 15:11-19]. And the Bible tells us we will pay for our folly.

What is your life? The Bible says, "It is even as a vapor, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away" [James 4:14]. And the Bible says that life is brief, that it is very short. The Bible says redeem the time. "Number your days, that you may apply your hearts unto wisdom" [Psalm 90:12].

I believe Christ is the answer to idle hours. Your days can be filled with joyous service and purposeful living. You give yourself to Jesus Christ, and I'll guarantee you won't be bored. I have never been bored since I gave my life to Jesus Christ. Every moment of these twenty-four years has been thrilling, joyous, zestful--with new wonders unfolding every day. I have never known a moment I can say truthfully when I was bored, when I didn't have anything to do. The youth who sobs today, "There's nothing, absolutely nothing to do," should join up with Christ. In His cause, there's never a dull moment.

The rich young ruler was like some of you. He was searching for eternal life. He must have felt the emptiness and the boredom coming to young people today. He was rich in possessions but poor in things that really counted. And he turned to Jesus and said, "What can I do to have a new life? What can I do to have eternal life? What can I do to have the joy and thrill out of this life?" [See Mark 10:17-22.]

Young people are searching for a good time. I don't blame you. You don't find in the Bible that God wants us to go around with a long face. We're to have a good time. We're to enjoy life in the right way. You don't have to go out here and get drunk to have a good time. You don't have to go out and park in an automobile to have a good time. You can have a good time with Christ at the center of your life, and there's plenty of activity for young people who know Christ. You won't have enough hours in the day to do the things you want to do if you have given yourself to Jesus Christ.

A young fellow got off the plane many years ago in Illinois to play the violin for me in a youth meeting. He had a dark tie on, dark suit, dark socks, black horn-rimmed glasses, and a big shock of black hair. He never cracked a smile. I said, "Where are you going?" He said, "I'm going to play at the meeting for you." I said, "Not like that. What's the matter with you?" He said, "I've just been converted." I said, "You come with me."

We went downtown and I bought him a red tie, red socks, red handkerchief. I said, "Get a smile on your face." He looked relieved and smiled. A few weeks later I saw him in Minneapolis where he was teaching music in a university. He came up to me, and he had a big red bow tie on. And he had a grin from ear to ear. He said, "How am I doing?" And I said, "Boy, you are cooking with gas now." I said, "That's great." I said, "You look like a Christian." But a lot of people have the idea that a Christian is a very pious person who never smiles, and never laughs, and goes around with a long face. No, that is not a Christian. All the way through the Scriptures, the Bible says we are to enjoy life.

When Paul and Silas were in prison after they had been beaten, they were singing, and rejoicing, and testifying to each other [see Acts 16:23-25]. Christ wants you to have a good time, but have a good time in the right way. Give your life to Christ, and I will guarantee you He will give you peace and joy that you have never known.

Then there is a sense of being misunderstood by parents. How many teenagers have told me that they are misunderstood and their parents don't understand them! I believe that is very often true. I don't think that parents should treat teenagers like children. They should be treated as grownups, and parents need to take time with their young people.

A father said to me some years ago when I was counseling with him, "Well, I buy my kids clothes, I give them an automobile, give them everything they want. What else do they want?" And the kid who was in jail just told me that his dad hadn't spent an hour with him in two months.

I know one father who gave his boy, for Christmas, a little note wrapped up in a beautiful package. He handed it to the boy. And the boy looked at it, a little bit disappointed that he hadn't gotten a bigger gift, opened it up and read the note. The note said this: "I pledge, son, to spend fifteen minutes a day and an hour on Saturdays and Sundays with you alone." The boy ran and put his arms around his dad and kissed him and said, "Dad, that is the greatest Christmas present you ever gave me."

You have no idea how your children are longing to talk to you. And when a child opens up and starts talking, you put everything else aside. Because they may never be open to that subject again, and you will have missed a great thing in their life. Take time with your young people! Love them! They need love during the teenage, adolescent period. They need patience.

You should set an example! You tell them to go to Sunday school, but you don't go yourself. You tell them they ought to read the Bible, but they don't see you reading it. You tell them they ought to believe in God and Christ, but they never see you pray! And young people learn more by watching than they do by listening. And if they hear you cursing and swearing, they are going to curse and swear.

You don't allow them to drink, but you drink. And they are going to do it, because they're going to do and be just what you are.

And then parents need to exercise loving discipline for their young people. I don't mean just spank them, although sometimes that may be necessary if they are young enough. One lady said to me, "All my little boy needs is a pat on the back." I said, "Lady, if it's low enough and hard enough, it'll do some good." But I mean loving, tender discipline.

I have a teenage daughter. Once in a while I have to discipline her. And also I call her in and just spend a half-an-hour loving her. Then I explain what I am going to do to her--going to take away television, or something like that for awhile. Then I love her for about a half-an-hour afterwards. And I have found that the discipline always pays if it's done in the right way. But if it's carried out in anger, it's like a fight between the child and the parents.

And then, give young people a sense of responsibility and accomplishment. I found that confidence and compliments go much farther than pushing and prodding. They long to hear a word of confidence from their parents. Try to understand your teenager.

Then lastly, there is the fact of the young person today searching for a challenge. Dr. Pitt Van Dusen[?] recently said, "Youth cherishes no extravagant ambitions. They are moral neutralists. They are tolerant of almost anything and shocked by nothing, searching for a challenge."

Young people today want a flag to follow. They want something to challenge them. I believe that in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, they have a challenge. I believe that when you open the pages of the Scripture, its words become a living flame and leap into your hearts. You read in there the story of Jesus Christ, His miraculous birth--this Lord Jesus Christ who went through life making the blind to see, and the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk.

I can follow that Christ. I can believe in that Christ. I can make Him my pattern and my ideal. I'm not believing in some sissy. I'm not believing in some effeminate character. I'm believing in a real he-man, a real man who had a square jaw and strong shoulders. I believe that Jesus Christ was the most perfectly developed physical specimen in the history of the world. He never had sin to deform His body, His mind was perfect, His nervous system was perfectly coordinated with the rest of His body. He would have been one of the great athletes of all times--every inch a man. I can believe in Him; I can follow Him.

And then I see Him with courage and boldness, and yet tenderness and love, as He goes to the cross. Not for His sins; He had none. He went because He loved you.

We always admire a man on a battlefield who will die for his fellows. We always admire a man who will take the place of another, and go and die if necessary. Jesus Christ went to the cross. He went out of love, and He demonstrated the love of God when He died on that cross. And when His blood was being shed, that blood was being poured out in your place. He didn't have to die, but "God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself" [2 Corinthians 5:19]--for you.

Now Jesus says, "Follow me. Believe in me. Come after me." He said, "If you want to follow me, you will have to deny self, and take up the cross, and follow me" [see Matthew 16:24]. There's a challenge. There's something to challenge every red-blooded young man and young woman tonight. There's a person that you can follow and give yourself to with confidence, and believe in, though you'll never be able to understand it all intellectually.

If you wait until you can put God in a test tube, you'll never come. If you wait until you put God in a mathematical formula, you'll never come and give your life to Christ. Don't expect to understand it all intellectually. You'll never do it. You have got to come by faith.

I don't understand how a black cow can eat green grass and produce white milk and yellow butter. But I drink milk. I don't understand television, but I watch television. I don't understand a thousand things every day, but I accept them by faith. I don't understand all about Christ. I'll never understand the mystery of the atonement. I'll never understand all about the great, mighty God. But by faith I receive Him.

And I have a lot of people on the university and college campuses. I go to the university. I spend about one-fourth of my time on the university campuses. This year I had the privilege of holding the mission at Vassar and at Smith College. Every year I give the Christmas address at West Point. Last year I held an eight-day mission for Yale University.

This year it was my privilege to be at Stanford University and the University of California where we had eleven thousand people, the largest crowd to ever hear a speaker at the University of California. And I sat up until 12:00 and 1:00 and 2 o'clock with these people, grappling with their problems. They have intellectual problems. And I have never won one of them by argument, but very often when he sees that it is by faith. Some of these people and professors can shatter your faith. If it were not by faith, they can't disturb me in the slightest, because it is my faith. They bring some scientific problem up that I can't understand. I can't get it connected with the Bible, and I say that I accept the Bible by faith. They can't answer that.

That's a dimension that many of them don't know. It's by faith that I give myself to the Christ who died. But, oh, He didn't stay on the cross. He rose again. He's a living Savior tonight. And I tell you this, young people: There is no other flag to follow that offers any hope. There is no other person to follow that offers any hope for the future except the person of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is a living Savior and who has promised to come back again.

It may seem that we are losing. It may seem at times that we are in the minority--and we are. But we have been promised in this book that the kingdom of God shall some day triumph. And I do not believe that communism or any other ism will conquer the world. I believe that Christ alone shall conquer. His kingdom shall be built. We are on the winning side, and some day He is coming back to claim His own. Let's give ourselves to Him, and follow Him, and serve Him with everything we've got until then.

There are three reasons why I ask you tonight to give yourselves to Christ. First, it is a harder way. It is not easy to be a Christian. Don't get an idea that it is easy being a Christian, and you just sort of float along, and all you have to do is believe and that's all. Oh, no! You must receive, you must believe--but that is only the beginning. The step that many hundreds of you, I trust, will take tonight is only the first step. It is only the beginning. You see, you have been going this way in your life, and now, tonight, you turn around. You start in a new direction. When there comes the cross to bear, there come the problems to face--but Christ will be there with you, giving you help as you solve the problems of tomorrow.

You go back to the high school campus or the college campus tomorrow, and you will face problems. You will face the old gang. How will you face it? Christ will be with you. He says He will go with us. He said, "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, that leads to life, and few there be that find it" [see Matthew 7:14].

Now the crowd, the largest crowd, the majority, are taking the broad road. Down that hill is plenty of leisure, plenty of boredom, plenty of noise. But the future is not very promising, because Jesus said it leads to destruction and hell [see Matthew 7:13].

Jesus said, "Young man, young woman, father, mother, take the narrow way because it leads to eternal life." It may be harder; it might be more difficult. It might even mean suffering and death. But in the midst of the battles of life, Christ says, "My grace will be sufficient. My joy will be your joy. My peace will be your peace. I will give you a new dynamic and a new strength for living. You can face the problems of tomorrow and live as a Christian, because I will be with you." Yes, it's a harder way.

Out in Indonesia there was a man, a great giant of a missionary, a university graduate, former all-star football player. And he'd gone out to the jungles of Borneo to give himself in missionary service. One day he got a letter from a big oil company--The Shell Oil Company. The oil company said, "We want to explore the possibilities of oil in Borneo, and we understand that you know more about that inland country than any man in the world. We would like to have your help." He said, "I'm not interested."

So they sent a delegation to call on him. And they said, "We are prepared to pay you seventy-five thousand dollars a year if that's what it takes. We've got to have you. You know the language of these tribes; you know these people. We must have your help." He said, "Your price is all right, but your job is too small. Jesus Christ has called me to preach His Gospel. And so help me, I shall do no other."

Young persons, I am asking you to enter into the kingdom of Christ tonight, to follow Him, to serve Him. Will you do it?

John Mott pulled himself up to his full height. And he said, "Mr. President, this is indeed a great honor. But a few years ago I was called to be an ambassador to the King of kings and the Lord of lords. And I shall not stoop to be an ambassador of the United States to Japan, because mine is a higher calling."

Give yourself to Christ tonight. Follow Him and serve Him. Let Him change your life and make you a new person. You say, "Well, Billy, I'm already a member of the church, trying to do the best I can." But have you really come to a moment of commitment in your life? Have you come to a moment when you really have given yourself to Christ? Do you know that your sins are forgiven? Do you know, if you died right now, that you'd go to heaven? Have you really said to Christ, "Oh, Christ, all I have is yours; I want to be yours from tonight on"?

Father, mother--with gray hairs, and bifocals, and bunions, and bulges--have you given yourself to Christ? Are you sure that your sins are forgiven? I want to warn you about something. If God has spoken to you tonight--and I believe that He has spoken to hundreds--don't you put it off. You come tonight.
 Now, tonight I want you to turn with me to the 12th chapter of the gospel according to Luke. How many of you have your Bibles? Lift them up, way up. Wonderful. We want you to bring your Bible every night. The 12th chapter of the gospel according to Luke, beginning at verse 15. Now, let's begin at the 1st verse. I will read the first three verses, then skip over to verse 15.

This is Christ talking. Now Christ has been going up and down the country making the blind to see, and the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk, and the dead to rise. He has been feeding the hungry. And as He is going around, of course, Christ is also teaching the people. And so on this occasion, He is teaching a great group of people.

"In the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people, insomuch that they trode one upon another, he began to say unto his disciples first of all, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees . . ." [verse 1]. Now what was the thing that He was warning them to beware of in the Pharisees? He says it in the next phrase, "which is hypocrisy." Jesus seems to hate hypocrisy almost as much as any other sin, people who profess to be Christians, but they do not live like it. "For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed" [verse 2]. In other words, Jesus is saying, "You can't cover your sins. Some day they are going to be revealed."

I heard about a man some years ago who had a watermelon patch down here near Pageland, the watermelon capital of the world. And his son went out with him one day and they looked over the watermelon patch. It was early in June, and the watermelons weren't ripe yet. He saw his son licking his chops and the water coming to his mouth, and he knew what his son was thinking. He said, "Son, now I've got to go to town. Don't you touch those watermelons, or you know what you'll get." The son, of course, said, "Yes, sir." And the father went on to town.

And the boy was in the hot sunshine, and he began to thump the melons. Finally, he came to one that he knew was dead ripe. He looked all around and couldn't see anybody. So he plucked it, took it down to a little stream, cooled it off, broke it open, and ate it.

Then afterwards, he wondered what he was going to do with the seeds and the rind. So he got a stick, dug a little hole, put the rind and the seeds in it, and covered them over with pine needles. And everything was all right for two weeks. He'd covered it up. Nobody knew anything about it.

His father didn't find out until one day as he was coming up from the pasture driving a cow and saw a strange sight. He saw watermelon sprouts everywhere. And he took a stick and dug down, and there he saw the decayed rind and the sprouting seeds. And he said, "I see." And a few hours later the boy saw--in a different way.

God says there is coming a day when everything that is covered shall be brought out, shall be made known. You have never committed a sin in your life that won't be brought out in the judgment of God. Everything that you ever covered, everything you ever tried to hide, is going to be brought out. So said Jesus. "Therefore, whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness"--therefore, whatsoever he hath spoken in darkness--"shall be heard in the light" [verse 3]. In other words, the thoughts and motives and inference of your heart that were covered up, and that you thought nobody heard, and nobody would hear about.

And then He skips over to the 15th verse, and He continues: "And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth. And he spake a parable unto them, saying, the ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully: and he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my goods? And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided? So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God" [verses 15-21].

Jesus said, "Beware of covetousness." And the tenth commandment says, "Thou shalt not covet" [Exodus 20:17]. And I believe tonight that the greatest sin in America is the sin of covetousness.

Americans are considered all over the world as materialistic, worldly, secular, greedy, and covetous. We are guilty of that sin as a nation, as a people, and as individuals. Americans have the highest standard of living the world has ever known. Never in history--in Rome, in Babylon, in the great nations of the past--has there ever been a standard of living like we enjoy in America.

You say, "But, Billy, I'm not a rich person." You have shoes, don't you? You have a suit of clothes; you have a dress. Then you are rich by the world's standards. You had something to eat, didn't you? In India tonight, over a hundred million people will go to bed hungry tonight--if they have a bed to go to. And when they drive the trucks down the streets of Calcutta tomorrow morning, they will pick up people that died of starvation, as I have seen them in India. The poorest person in this audience tonight is rich by the world's standards.

And in spite of our riches, in spite of our high standard of living, our whole economy is geared to getting more. The capitalist wants more profit. The laboring man wants more wages for less hours. And all of us are engaged in a mad race--trampling over each other, cheating each other, lying, stealing, any way we can get it--to get another dollar. The Bible says it's the sin of covetousness. "Thou shall not covet."

The word "covetousness" means to delight in something. It's the object of your attention--to wish for, to desire it, to love, to set your heart on. Something that fascinates, something that you long for, something that you are looking for; to get more of this world's goods, even if it means the starvation of your own soul.

You are a rich man, and you are a rich person now. I'm not talking about the millionaire now. I'm talking about the man that makes twenty-five dollars a week. I am talking about a rich American.

This man went out, looked over his fields and he saw his barn. And he said, "Soul, take thine ease, drink and be merry, you've laid up enough goods. You've got economic security now. You've got money in the bank. You've got good insurance policies. You've got a good job. You've got a good business. Take it easy. Go and get you a little cottage in Florida and take it easy." God says, "Wait a minute."

That man went to his room that night and retired in his soft bed. About midnight, the servants heard a scream. They ran to the master's room and they found him on the floor, writhing and dying, and his hands folded in a strange manner as though he had been holding on to something and suddenly it had slipped away. And they heard a voice from heaven that said, "Thou fool, this night thy soul is required of thee."

God said that any man that will give himself to the making of money over and against the development and nature of his own soul is a fool, and doesn't deserve to live. Jesus said, "Out of the heart proceeds covetousness. These evil things come from within, in defilement of man" [see Mark 7:21-23].

The Scripture again says in Ephesians 5:3 that "fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you." Also, in verse 5, "Nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of . . . God."

God says that covetousness is actually idolatry, and He says a covetous person has no place in the kingdom of God. No place in the kingdom of God--the Bible says that in Ephesians 5:3 and 5. I just read it to you. If words mean anything, it means that a covetous person shall not go to heaven, shall not be saved. You say, "Well, Billy, isn't a man supposed to take care of his family?" Yes. The Bible says, "Give me not poverty lest I steal" [see Proverbs 30:8,9].

We are to have enough, but we're not to give our full attention to the things of the world. Our first attention is to be on Christ. We are to seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, then all of these things shall be added unto us [see Matthew 6:33].

Is that what you're doing? Are you seeking God's kingdom first? Are you seeking the things of Christ first? Or is your business, your pleasure, your amusement--the things of this world--first in your life?

God gave the law of the Ten Commandments. He knew that you couldn't keep the Ten Commandments when He gave them. It is impossible for any of us not to have covetousness. I look into the Ten Commandments, and I see how far short I have come. And I say to myself, "I'm a sinner." That's what God wants you to say. Blessed be God when any man will say, "I am a sinner." Because then you've taken your first step to the kingdom of God. When you realize that you can't save yourself, that you're a sinner, that you're lost, that you're barred from the kingdom of God, then you have taken your first step. Have you ever humbled yourself and said, "I am a sinner"? Have you ever been able to face it realistically that you've come short of God's requirements and God's law, and that you are a sinner?

All right, look at the Ten Commandments. Look at Jesus. You haven't always lived like Jesus. And if you haven't measured up to Jesus, then you're a sinner. You've come short. Then the Bible says the law becomes a schoolmaster--and drives, drives, drives, ushers, leads, drives me to the cross [see Galatians 3:24].

And I come to the cross where Christ died for my sins, where He was made to be righteousness for us who had no righteousness; where He was made to be sin for us, since He knew no sin [see 2 Corinthians 5:21]. Jesus Christ died on the cross. And I come to the cross; and I say, "Dear God, I am a sinner. I am willing to forsake my sins."

I told God, "I don't have the power to forsake my sins. I tried to live a good life, and I failed. I tried to be good, but I cannot be good, because when I meant to be good, I found evil pressing within me. There is an evil principle down inside of me, which is pulling me and tugging at me--there's nothing that I can do!" [See Romans 7:18-20.] And the apostle said, "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" [verse 24].

I hear the thunders of Mount Sinai, and I hear the Word of God saying, "The wages of sin is death" [Romans 6:23]. The wages of sin is hell. I deserve to be lost. I deserve hell. I deserve judgment. My sins are damning me. And when I say that, and when I come to the cross, and when I ask God for grace, I ask Him for His love. I ask Him for His mercy. And coming from that cross is love, and mercy, and forgiveness. I don't deserve it!

You can't work your way to heaven if you join every church in town. You could work from now on, and you could never save yourself. Salvation is by the grace and mercy of God. Ladies and gentlemen, we are all sinners. We all deserve hell, and we are going to get hell, unless we are willing to repent and come to the cross; hell in this life, and in the life to come.

Covetousness is a sin that drives a man from the kingdom, and we are guilty. Eve was guilty of covetousness when she desired the forbidden fruit [see Genesis 3:1-6]. Achan in hiding the treasure [see Joshua 7:18-26]. David in desiring Bathsheba [see 2 Samuel 11:1-5]. Ahab in desiring Naboth's vineyards [see 1 Kings 21]. The moneychangers in the temple [see Matthew 21:12,13]. Judas with the thirty pieces of silver [see Matthew 26:14-16]. Demas in forsaking Paul for the love of the world [see 2 Timothy 4:10]. All of these people were guilty of covetousness. And God said that a covetous person is idolatrous [see Colossians 3:5]. And God hates idolatry more than any other sin.

What is worldliness? Well, the Bible warns continually against worldliness. In Romans 12:2, Paul said, "Be not conformed to this world." To the Corinthians he wrote, "Come out . . . and be ye separate" [2 Corinthians 6:17]. To the Athenians he said, "Be not

... therefore partakers with . . . and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them" [Ephesians 5:7,11]. To the Colossians he wrote, "Put off the old man . . . Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth" [Colossians 3:2,9]. To the Thessalonians he wrote, "Abstain from all appearance of evil" [1 Thessalonians 5:22]. To Timothy he wrote, "No man that goeth to war entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him that hath chosen him to be a soldier.... Flee . . . youthful lusts" [2 Timothy 2:4,22]. To Timothy he wrote, "Denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present hour" [Titus 2:12].

But James said, "Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is an enemy of God" [James 4:4]. If you are a friend of this world system--its pleasures, its amusement, you have your heart and affections set on it--then God says you are an enemy.

You say, "But, Billy, I don't feel like I'm an enemy of God." Then take it by faith, because God's Word says you are if you are taken up with the things of the world. Peter said, "Not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts" [1 Peter 1:14]. John said, "Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world"

[1 John 2:15]. All through the Scriptures we are told to be not conformed, to be separate, to be not partakers, to have no fellowship with the world. We are told to abstain, to deny worldly lusts, to love not the world, to keep ourselves from idols, to put off. And the Bible says, "All that is of the world, the lust of the flesh, . . . the lust of the eyes, . . . the pride of life, is not of God"

[1 John 2:16]. And God hates it. And God says a Christian is to be in the world, but not a part of it.

